Monthly Report
January 2024
Vol. 76  
No 1

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel.: +49 (0)69 9566 33512  
Email: www.bundesbank.de/kontakt
Internet: www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report 
went to press at 12 p.m. on 25 January 2024.Publishing schedules for selected statistics can 
be downloaded from our website. The statis -
tical data are also published on the website.
The Monthly Report is published by the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by 
virtue of Section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It is 
available to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German 
 language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
2

Contents
Commentaries  ..........................................................................................................  5
Economic conditions  ...........................................................................................................  5
Public finances  ....................................................................................................................  8
Risks facing Germany as a result of its economic ties with China  .......  11
The impact of Chinese supply chain shocks on manufacturing in Germany  ........................  17
Risks to financial stability in Germany on account of firms active in China ..........................  24
The outlook for cash – a systematic look at the future of cash  ...........  31
Public perspectives on the future of cash  ............................................................................  35
Methodology of the “Cash of the future” study  ..................................................................  42Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  66 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  75 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  85 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
4

Commentaries
Economic conditions
Underlying trends
Germany’s real gross domestic product (GDP) 
probably declined somewhat in the fourth 
quarter of 2023.1 Foreign orders for the Ger -
man industrial sector receded further. Higher 
financing costs continued to dampen invest -
ment, particularly in housing construction. Un -
certainty about the future direction of fiscal 
and climate policy is also likely to have weighed 
on economic activity. Consumers remained 
cautious. Their consumption expenditure is un -
likely to have increased by much, even though 
their scope for spending probably expanded 
seeing as the labour market remained robust, 
inflation came down and wages grew strongly. 
In addition, economic activity was dampened 
by unfavourable weather conditions for con -
struction activity and a relatively high sickness 
rate according to data from company health 
insurance funds. While the remaining backlog 
of orders in industry and construction is likely 
to have had a bolstering effect, output in both 
sectors dropped substantially. Overall, the 
economy is currently in slightly weaker shape 
than expected in the December projection. 
Signs that foreign demand for industrial goods 
had already bottomed out were not borne out 
by the data. In addition, the business climate 
deteriorated further in January 2024 according 
to the ifo Institute. However, households’ in -
come situation is improving as expected. All in 
all, German economic output could be stag -
nant at best in the first quarter of 2024.2 This 
would mean a delay in the recovery expected 
in the December projection.3
According to provisional calculations by the 
Federal Statistical Office, real GDP shrank by 
0.3% on the year in 2023 as a whole (and by 
0.1% after calendar adjustment). Weak foreign 
demand and high energy costs weighed on in -
dustry and exports. At the same time, higher financing costs pushed down investment, espe -
cially in housing construction. Households also 
held back on spending, and government con -
sumption saw a steep drop in the absence of 
pandemic- related expenditure.
Industry
In November 2023, industrial output continued 
on its downward trajectory, which began in the 
second quarter. Averaged over October and 
November, output was well below the previous 
quarter’s level after seasonal adjustment.4 The 
decline was broadly based across all sectors, al -
though automotive production was compara -
tively robust. According to data from the Ger -
man Association of the Automotive Industry, 
which are available up to December, the num -
ber of passenger cars manufactured in the 
fourth quarter was only slightly lower than in 
the previous quarter. Industry was still up 
against persistent weak demand. Averaged 
over October and November, industrial new 
orders saw another sharp decline compared 
with the previous quarter. Even excluding large German eco -
nomic output 
probably down 
somewhat in Q4 
2023 and could 
be stagnant at 
best in Q1 2024
Real GDP down 
by calendar- 
adjusted 0.1% 
according to 
provisional 
annual figures 
for 2023Industry still 
suffering  from 
weak demand 
in November
1 The Federal Statistical Office’s provisional calculations of 
GDP for 2023 as a whole are based on a decline in real 
GDP in the fourth quarter of 2023 by a seasonally adjusted 
0.3%, after a stagnant third quarter. This figure stems from 
less complete data than the regular quarterly calculation. 
The regular flash estimate for GDP in the fourth quarter of 
2023 will be released on 30  January 2024. See Federal 
Statistical Office (2024).
2 In addition, the possibility of production losses due to the 
long strike by the German train drivers’ union ( Gewerk -
schaft Deutscher Lokomotivführer  – GDL) cannot be ruled 
out. This is because production losses have so far increased 
disproportionately once a strike exceeds a certain length. 
One thing preventing larger production losses is the fact 
that storage capacity has improved recently, at least in the 
manufacturing sector; see Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a). 
Furthermore, Deutsche Bahn’s market share in rail freight is 
likely to have fallen compared with previous GDL strikes, 
shifting towards competitors which are not currently strik -
ing.
3 The projection states that the German economy should 
be heading onto an expansion path at the beginning of 
2024; see Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b).
4 Seasonal adjustment here and in the remainder of this 
text also includes adjustment for calendar variations, pro -
vided they can be verified and quantified.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
5

orders, the drop was significant and related to 
orders from both Germany and abroad. Weak 
foreign demand was also evident in exports of 
goods, which, when averaged over October 
and November, were slightly below the third-  
quarter level in price- adjusted terms. Industrial 
orders on hand decreased further in November, 
but were still high in a longer-  term compari -
son. They were thus continuing to act as a buf -
fer recently against the decline in new orders 
and prevented an even stronger dip in output.
Construction
Construction output fell steeply in November 
2023 in seasonally adjusted terms. When aver -
aged over October and November, too, it con -
tracted strongly compared with the third quar -
ter. The sharp decline affected building con -
struction, civil engineering and the finishing 
trades alike. The prolonged dip in demand is 
likely to have had a stronger impact on output 
recently. According to ifo Institute surveys, the 
share of firms in the main construction sector 
reporting a shortage of orders continued to 
grow significantly, averaging 38% in the fourth 
quarter. The reach of order books was still 
above the long- term average but is distinctly 
diminished compared with its peak in February 
2022. Survey results from the ifo Institute also 
indicate that unfavourable weather conditions 
put an additional strain on construction output 
in the fourth quarter. This was probably due 
mainly to the high level of precipitation.5
Labour market
Employment shook off the weak economy in 
November, too. As in October, the number of 
persons employed rose slightly. Developments 
in employment subject to social security contri -Construction 
output affected 
by subdued 
demand and 
temporary bad 
weather
Slight employ -
ment growth in 
November, out -
look slightly 
improvedEconomic conditions in Germany*
Seasonally and calendar adjusted
PeriodOrders received (volume); 2015 = 100
Industry
Main con-
struction Totalof which:
Domestic Foreign
2023 Q1 101.3 94.7 106.3 102.4
 Q2 101.8 96.6 105.7 104.8
 Q3 97.9 89.7 104.2 119.1
 Sep. 99.0 86.9 108.2 116.8
 Oct. 95.2 88.7 100.1 110.5
 Nov. 95.5 89.9 99.7 102.3
Output; 2015 = 100
Industry
Con-
struction Totalof which:
Inter-
mediate
goodsCapital
goods
2023 Q1 97.6 96.9 97.9 114.2
 Q2 96.9 95.3 98.0 112.9
 Q3 95.0 94.3 95.2 111.9
 Sep. 94.1 93.2 95.4 111.5
 Oct. 93.7 92.8 94.8 109.6
 Nov. 93.2 92.3 94.1 106.4
Foreign trade; € billion Memo
item:
Current
account
balance 
in € billion Exports Imports Balance
2023 Q1 398.72 352.14 46.58 59.14
 Q2 393.71 343.39 50.32 69.47
 Q3 386.36 334.29 52.07 74.33
 Sep. 126.97 109.95 17.02 25.94
 Oct. 126.47 108.77 17.71 22.99
 Nov. 131.24 110.46 20.78 26.88
Labour market
Employ-
mentVacan-
cies1Un-
employ-
mentUn-
employ-
ment rate
% Number in thousands
2023 Q2 45,949 770 2,587 5.6
 Q3 45,934 741 2,633 5.7
 Q4 … 734 2,693 5.8
 Oct. 45,939 732 2,677 5.8
 Nov. 45,961 732 2,698 5.8
 Dec. … 738 2,703 5.9
Prices; 2015 = 100
Import
pricesProducer
prices of
industrial
productsCon-
struction
prices 2Harmon-
ised con-
sumer
prices
2023 Q2 126.5 149.4 161.0 125.6
 Q3 125.2 147.1 161.6 126.6
 Q4 … 146.1 162.4 126.7
 Oct. 127.2 147.1 . 126.9
 Nov. 127.2 146.4 . 126.7
 Dec. … 144.8 . 126.6
* For explanatory notes, see Statistical Section, XI, and Statistical 
Series – Seasonally adjusted business statistics. 1  Excluding 
government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs. 
2 Not seasonally and calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank5 According to the German Meteorological Service (Deut -
scher Wetterdienst),  November and December, in particu -
lar, were exceptionally wet. December also saw parts of 
northern Germany, especially, affected by flooding. See 
Deutscher Wetterdienst (2023a, 2023b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
6

butions were particularly positive recently. The 
initial estimate by the Federal Employment 
Agency –  which is available for October  – 
shows an increase of 33,000 persons on the 
previous month in seasonally adjusted terms. 
There was a substantial improvement in the 
number of jobs filled in business services. Em -
ployment growth remains favourable in the 
healthcare and long- term care sector and the 
public sector. By contrast, economic develop -
ments dampened employment in the areas of 
temporary agency employment, trade and, to a 
small extent, in the manufacturing sector. In 
October, just under 180,000 employees made 
use of short- time work for economic reasons, 
somewhat more than one month earlier. Even 
so, the employment outlook continues to sta -
bilise. Leading indicators of employment im -
proved across the board – albeit only slightly – 
in December.
Registered unemployment rose only marginally 
by 5,000 persons in December after seasonal 
adjustment. In the preceding months, it had in -
creased quite markedly. The number of persons 
registered as unemployed remained at 2.70 
million due to rounding, putting the unemploy -
ment rate at 5.9%. The average unemployment 
rate for 2023 as a whole is 5.7%, representing 
an increase of 0.4 percentage point from 2022. 
This was driven mainly by the large number of 
immigrants, especially refugees. For example, 
Ukrainian refugees were integrated into Ger -
many’s social security system from around the 
middle of 2022, which primarily had an impact 
on figures for the basic welfare allowance. 
Moreover, despite robust employment growth, 
economic developments last year were too 
weak to completely prevent an increase in re -
cipients of benefits under the unemployment 
insurance scheme and, at the same time, to 
offer immigrants more employment opportun -
ities. The outlook for the next few months is 
less unfavourable than recently. The unemploy -
ment barometer of the Institute for Employ -
ment Research (IAB) picked up somewhat in 
December, but remains in negative territory. This suggests that unemployment will not rise 
much more in the next three months.
Commodity prices
Commodity prices for energy recently saw an -
other slight drop overall. As this report went to 
press, one megawatt hour of gas (TTF) cost 
€28 in Europe, just under 40% less than at the 
end of November 2023. This was mainly due to 
the unseasonably high temperatures at times, 
subdued industrial demand for gas, stable gas 
supplies and very well- stocked European gas 
storage facilities. By contrast, crude oil prices 
trended sideways. Prices were dampened by 
doubts about the implementation of the recent 
production decisions by some OPEC countries 
and their partners, as well as surprisingly high 
production levels in a number of non- OPEC 
countries. On the other hand, renewed con -
cerns about an escalation of the conflict in the 
Middle East recently put slight upward pressure 
on prices.
Inflation rate
The upstream stages of the economy tended to 
send out price- dampening signals. Import 
prices in November remained unchanged on 
the month, but non- energy prices were per -
ceptibly lower. In the case of producer prices, 
for which December data are already available, 
energy prices fell steeply. The prices of other 
goods went up slightly. Compared with the 
previous year, import prices were recently 
down by 9% and domestic producer prices by 
8½%.
Consumer prices declined again slightly in De -
cember in seasonally adjusted terms. Energy 
prices cooled further, while food prices re -
mained unchanged and industrial goods and 
services became slightly more expensive. On 
balance, the Harmonised Index of Consumer 
Prices (HICP) fell by 0.1% on the month after 
seasonal adjustment. Nevertheless, inflation Unemployment 
up only margin -
ally recentlyEnergy prices 
down again 
recently
Declining price 
pressures at 
upstream stages
Steep rise in 
inflation rate in 
December due 
to base effect, 
as expectedDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
7

rose steeply year on year, and the inflation rate 
climbed significantly from 2.3% in November 
to 3.8%.6 This increase had been expected and 
was mainly due to the immediate government 
assistance for gas and district heating pay -
ments granted as a one- off in December 2022. 
Because of the base effect, this meant that the 
energy component’s previous strongly negative 
contribution to the headline rate turned dis -
tinctly positive again. Core inflation excluding 
energy and food prices held roughly steady at 
3.4% (November: 3.5%).
As in the previous year, the inflation rate in 
2023 was exceptionally high by historical 
standards. The annual average HICP rate was 
6.0% (2022: 8.7%), although inflation cooled 
significantly over the course of the year.7 The 
continued high rate of inflation was due, in 
particular, to the very high price rises for food, 
which had increased further compared with 
2022. Services prices also picked up more 
sharply in 2023 than they had done previously. 
By contrast, the rate for industrial goods re -
mained unchanged and fell quite considerably 
for energy. However, these two components 
also continued to see above average price in -
creases as measured by the long- term average. 
At the beginning of this year, the inflation rate 
is likely to come back down markedly with the 
elimination of the base effect from December 
which had driven up the rate.
Public finances8
Local government finances
Local governments (core budgets and off-  
budget entities) posted a deficit of €4 billion in 
the third quarter of 2023,9 which amounted to 
a deterioration of €5 billion on the same quar -
ter of the previous year. The revenue increases 
from taxes and transfers from state govern -
ment, for example, were unable to keep pace 
with the broad- based strong growth in ex -
penditure.Revenue rose substantially, by 8% (+€6½ bil -
lion). Growth in fee revenue was particularly 
strong, at 24% (+€2 billion). This was mainly 
due to the fact that public transport companies 
were reallocated to the general government 
sector in the second quarter of 2023. Since 
then, they have been categorised as off- budget 
entities.10 Total revenue from the core budgets 
alone therefore also increased much more 
slowly, by just under 5%. Tax revenue rose by 
only 3½% (+ €1 billion). Although receipts from 
local business tax – a large revenue item – saw 
dynamic growth of 10% (after deduction of the 
shares accruing to other government levels), in -
come tax revenue fell. State government trans -
fers rose by 5% (+ €1½ billion).
At 14%, growth in expenditure was much 
stronger than that in revenue. This was also a 
reflection of the fact that public transport com -
panies now form part of the general govern -
ment sector. In the core budgets alone, ex -
penditure rose by 10%. Overall, other operat -
ing expenditure and fixed asset formation saw 
very strong growth, in which inflation probably 
continued to play an important role. In add -
ition, personnel expenditure increased sharply 
(by 16%, or +€3½ billion). This reflected, not 
least, the high wage settlement agreed in 
spring 2023. There was a significant rise of 11% 
in social spending, not least on accommoda -
tion costs for recipients of the basic allowance.
Local government budgets are expected to 
post a marked deficit for 2023 as a whole 
(2022 as a whole: surplus of €2½ billion), as, Inflation excep -
tionally high by 
historical stand -
ards in 2023, 
too
Local govern -
ments posted a 
clear deficit in 
Q3 2023 – 
balance  far less 
favourable than 
in previous yearWeak growth in 
major revenue 
items, fee rev -
enue affected by 
reclassification 
of public 
transport 
Strong expend -
iture growth
6 The annual rate of consumer inflation according to the 
national consumer price index (CPI) rose from 3.2% to 
3.7%.
7 The CPI rate fell from 6.9% to 5.9%.
8 The short commentaries on public finances present cash 
outturns that were not yet available when the previous 
quarterly report on public finances (February, May, August 
and November) went to press. A detailed overview of the 
data can be found in the statistical section of this report.
9 Data for local governments in Saarland for the third quar -
ter of 2023 were not yet available. The Federal Statistical 
Office included data from the same quarter of the previous 
year as a substitute.
10 In the core budgets, fee revenue grew by only 2%. For 
more details on the reclassification of public transport, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023c).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
8

after the first three quarters of 2023, they were 
just under €11 billion in deficit. As usual, a sur -
plus is on the cards for the final quarter due to 
the fact that the quarterly income tax shares 
are settled during the course of the year. Local 
governments therefore receive two- quarters of 
this revenue in the final quarter. However, this 
surplus will not compensate for the deficit ac -
cumulated thus far, even if revenue- related bur -
dens from the previous year are eliminated.11 
Local governments are therefore likely to post a 
significantly less favourable balance than in 
2022. After the first three quarters, the result 
had deteriorated by as much as €10 billion 
from the same period of the previous year.
A deficit for local government appears to be on 
the cards for this year, too. Although the latest 
tax estimate expected tax revenue to grow sig -
nificantly by just under 5%, revenue from state 
government transfers could see a noticeably 
slower increase. This is due, in particular, to the 
state governments’ weak tax revenue in the 
previous year. Price increases will probably still 
have a broad impact on spending. In addition, 
the wage settlement for central and local gov -
ernment employees will continue to have a 
strong impact on personnel expenditure.Local govern -
ment expected 
to post a 
marked deficit 
for 2023 as a 
whole
Deficit on the 
cards for 2024, 
too
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a), Adjustments to the international supply chains of German firms 
and impact on their production costs, Monthly Report, December 2023, pp. 64-66.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b), Falling inflation, but not yet time to sound the all- clear – outlook 
for the German economy up to 2026, Monthly Report, December 2023, pp. 15-35.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023c), Public finances, Monthly Report, October 2023, pp. 8 f.
Deutscher Wetterdienst (2023a), The weather in Germany – Year 2023, press release of 29 Decem -
ber 2023, https://www.dwd.de/EN/press/press_node.html;jsessionid=6512DF4BB2987BA1BA2F93
8EEC4DEFD8.live31093Local government fiscal balance 
Source: Federal Statistical Office.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4Quarterly figures
963036912
–––++++
Cumulated from start of year 
(core budgets and off-budget entities)2021
2022
2023
–12–9–6–30+3+6
2022
2023€ billion
Off-budget entitiesCore budgets
2021
11 Local government budgets came under pressure in the 
final quarter of 2022, as the energy price allowance paid 
out in the previous quarter reduced their income tax shares 
for the third quarter. In some federal states, third-  quarter 
revenue has an impact on the advance payments for 
fourth- quarter income tax shares. This exceptional burden 
on local government budgets in the final quarter of 2022 
was offset at the beginning of 2023 by final settlements.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
9

Deutscher Wetterdienst (2023b), The weather in Germany – December 2023, press release of 
29  December 2023, https://www.dwd.de/EN/press/press_release/EN/2023/20231229_the_
weather_in_germany_in_december_2023.html?nn=789662
Federal Statistical Office (2024), Gross domestic product down 0.3% in 2023, press release 019/ 24 
of 15 January 2024.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
10

Risks facing Germany as a result of its 
economic  ties with China
Germany’s economy has been forging ever closer ties with the People’s Republic of China (PRC), 
in particular since the latter joined the World Trade Organization (WTO) back in 2001. This closer 
relationship has seen Germany reap handsome gains from China’s rapid emergence as an eco -
nomic power. Those ties also present a growing source of risk, however. Important challenges lie 
ahead for China’s economy, and even an economic crisis with global spillover effects does not 
seem inconceivable. On top of this, relations between advanced economies in the West and the 
PRC have worsened noticeably of late, as shown by the uptick in trade and geopolitical tensions 
and risks and the like.
If these risks materialise, Germany’s economy could take a huge hit, especially if the extreme 
scenario of an abrupt economic decoupling from China were to play out. Industry in particular is 
home to a number of sectors that rely heavily on Chinese demand, and for some firms that are 
directly invested in China, substantial portions of their sales and profits would be at stake. The 
economic impact would be felt more broadly if deliveries of key intermediate inputs dried up, 
many of which would be virtually impossible to replace in the short term. The likely outcome of 
this would be production losses. What is more, an abrupt decoupling from China would probably 
leave the German economy aching under sharply increased uncertainty. If developments fol -
lowed a similar playbook elsewhere in the world, the global economy as a whole would be 
affected, adding to the downward pressure.
There are also risks to the stability of the German financial system. Granted, the German financial 
system’s direct links with China are on the small side. However, Germany’s banking sector is 
highly exposed to domestic enterprises that are heavily dependent on China. Far- reaching disrup -
tions in economic relations between the two countries would take a significant toll on these firms 
and ultimately leave them more likely to default on their loans. Losses of confidence and general 
economic weakness would add to the burden on the financial system in that kind of scenario.
All in all, a sudden massive deterioration in economic relations with China would leave Germany 
facing the prospect of severe economic disruptions. But even an orderly retreat from China would 
come at a considerable cost. German enterprises would miss out on a key sales market, and 
many supply chains could arguably only be recalibrated at the expense of sizeable losses in effi -
ciency. For some critical intermediate inputs, it would only be possible to scale back dependences 
over the medium to long term, if that. But there would be a downside for China, too, which con -
tinues to rely heavily on the West as a source of trade and technology. Maintaining good eco -
nomic relations, then, is in everyone’s interest. Even so, enterprises and politicians in Germany 
should do more to de- risk and to strengthen the resilience of the German economy.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
11

Introduction
Germany and China have a multifaceted rela -
tionship. Their intense trade relations are a 
catalyst for competition, innovation and wel -
fare, benefiting both sides for the most part. 
Beyond that, though, there are also mounting 
geopolitical tensions and accusations of unfair 
trade practices. This article focuses on the im -
plications of the economic ties between Ger -
many and China.
By embracing market reforms, China’s econ -
omy has managed to chart an impressive as -
cent in recent decades. Measured in terms of 
nominal gross domestic product (GDP) at mar -
ket exchange rates, China now ranks as the 
world’s second largest economy behind the 
United States. The German economy has bene -
fited from China’s economic success story in all 
manner of ways. Particularly the range of cap -
ital goods and motor vehicles exported from 
Germany has dovetailed well with the needs of 
the emerging market economy. Many German 
firms tapped into the fast- growing Chinese 
market by investing directly in the country. Ger -
man financial institutions contributed to the 
financing of this expansion. At the same time, 
China’s integration into the international div -
ision of labour made final products and key 
intermediate inputs more affordable in Ger -
many, which has also benefited consumers 
here.
That said, the closer economic ties forged with 
China also meant greater dependences and 
more risks, if only, to a degree, on account of 
China’s growing weight within the global econ -
omy. Problems in the Chinese economy move 
global financial and commodity markets and 
spill over into other economies via the foreign 
trade channel.1 They are also likely to leave 
their mark on Germany. Arguably, though, an 
abrupt and severe deterioration in economic 
relations with China will probably take a much 
greater toll.Recent years have seen tensions ratchet up be -
tween China and the West, largely on the back 
of political developments that are not primarily 
of an economic nature. But economic relations, 
too, have suffered in recent years. German rep -
resentatives often used to complain that it was 
tougher for German firms to access the Chi -
nese market than vice versa.2 In addition, last 
year saw China restrict exports of important 
commodities and raw materials as well as the 
technology needed to extract and process 
them, citing national security concerns.3 More -
over, many advanced economies have accused 
the PRC of infringing intellectual property rights 
and using unfair trade practices to its advan -
tage.4 Governments in advanced economies is -
sued a broad response to this with trade rem -
edies such as anti- dumping and countervailing 
duty actions.5 More worrying than potential 
competitive disadvantages is the concern that 
China might be able to access sensitive areas of 
public order in the event of a conflict. It is for 
this reason that Chinese enterprises’ equity in -
vestments in critical infrastructure and security- 
related technologies have come under increas -
ing scrutiny. Furthermore, some advanced 
economies have imposed restrictions on ex -
ports of high- tech goods to China, with polit -
ical relations between the United States and Many sides to 
Sino- German 
relationship
Close economic 
ties between 
Germany and 
China …
… are a source 
of riskPolitical relations  
worsened 
recently, …
1 China has also evolved into one of the world’s largest 
bilateral lenders. See Horn et al. (2023). This can impact on 
the global financial system because cross- border rescue 
lending may be less institutionalised, less transparent and 
more piecemeal in the future. This could present greater 
risks for Germany as an important net capital exporter.
2 For example, a long- standing rule, which was only largely 
repealed a few years ago, forced foreign manufacturers 
wanting to produce in China to enter into a joint venture.
3 For example, the Chinese government imposed new ex -
port restrictions on gallium, germanium and graphite and 
prohibited exports of technologies used to extract and sep -
arate rare earths. These moves thus signalled China’s will -
ingness to leverage its market position in the critical raw 
materials space for political gain.
4 One indication of competitive distortions is China’s ex -
ceptionally high industrial policy subsidy ratio, even by 
international standards. See DiPippo et al. (2022).
5 Thus, more than one- third of all anti- dumping and coun -
tervailing duty actions worldwide have currently been 
taken against China, according to the WTO Trade Remedies 
Data Portal.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
12

China in particular worsening further as a re -
sult.6
Geopolitical developments are a source of dan -
ger and considerable escalation risks. This is 
particularly true when one considers Taiwan, 
which enjoys close relations with many ad -
vanced economies. An escalation of geopolit -
ical tensions could set in motion a spiral of tit- 
for- tat economic and financial sanctions.
In addition, China’s economy faces some stiff 
economic challenges. Growth has been in 
structural decline for some time now,7 and cyc -
lical weakness aggravated the slowdown last 
year. This was partly due to the after- effects of 
income losses during the pandemic and the 
lengthy containment measures. Furthermore, 
the sharp downturn in the real estate market 
continued unabated.8 These events left a se -
vere dent in households’ and general govern -
ment finances,9 dampening economic activity 
further.
It cannot be ruled out that China’s economy 
will weaken further and even run into a crisis. 
Following years of overinvestment, buoyed in 
part by a highly expansionary economic policy, 
there is a danger of further corrections, and 
not just in the real estate sector. Overall, the 
high level of private and public debt in China is 
a source of considerable risk. In recent years, it 
wasn’t just real estate firms that ran into diffi -
culties but a growing number of government 
financing vehicles, too. If those vehicles need 
to be restructured, the brunt will probably be 
borne primarily by Chinese banks.10 Given the 
existing vulnerabilities within the banking sys -
tem, this could affect financial stability in China. 
These developments have prompted the Inter -
national Monetary Fund to warn of consider -
able risks to the global economy.11
Given the dangers to economic relations and 
the macroeconomic risks in China, what do the 
potential repercussions for Germany’s econ -
omy look like? First, in terms of real economy 
dependences. And second, concerning the risks that China presents to Germany’s financial 
system. This latter topic, which will be explored 
in particular detail later in this article, also illu -
minates vulnerabilities resulting from exposures 
to firms that rely heavily on China business.
Risks as a result of Germany’s 
real economy ties with China
China is an important pillar of the German 
economy in many respects. The risks associated 
with this relationship are no less diverse. One 
possible source of vulnerabilities is the focus on 
China as a market. Another is the reliance of 
many firms on Chinese intermediate inputs in 
their supply chains. For some, China also ranks 
as a key manufacturing location. If these rela -
tions were to deteriorate suddenly and mas -
sively, this could spread to firms that seem less 
directly exposed, for example through the con -
fidence and uncertainty effects it would un -
leash.… amid 
considerable  
geopolitical 
tensions 
China’s 
structural  and 
economic 
problems  …
… could usher 
in an economic 
crisis
Focus on 
implications  
for German 
economy6 The escalation of the trade disputes between the United 
States and China in 2018 and 2019 and its impact are sum -
marised in Deutsche Bundesbank (2020). Since then, the 
Biden administration in the United States has taken a raft 
of additional measures restricting trade with, foreign direct 
investment in, and technology transfers to China.
7 This illustrates the constraints of China’s export- driven 
growth model in particular, in addition to the demographic 
burden of a rapidly ageing population. Government efforts 
to recalibrate the economy and close the gap to the tech -
nological frontier in key industries have so far only de -
livered limited success. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2018, 
2023a).
8 For further reading on the implications of the downturn 
in China’s real estate market, see also Deutsche Bundes -
bank (2021a).
9 Real estate plays a significant role in households’ wealth 
in China. The fall in house prices has left them nursing con -
siderable losses, as reflected, amongst other things, by the 
very depressed level of consumer confidence. In addition, 
local governments saw a significant source of their revenue 
dry up as sales of land usage rights were less profitable or 
absent altogether. See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2014).
10 Local government financing vehicles’ debt amounted to 
almost half of GDP in 2022, with Chinese banks holding 
around four- fifths of the exposures. See International Mon -
etary Fund (2023a).
11 See International Monetary Fund (2023b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
13

Exports to China
German exports to China are of considerable 
importance for certain industrial sectors, but 
not of paramount importance for the economy 
as a whole.12 In 2022, Germany exported 
€107 billion worth of goods to China. With a 
7% share of total goods exports, China was the 
fourth most important importing country for 
Germany. Compared with other euro area 
countries, this means that a comparatively high 
share of exports goes to China. However, total 
exports to China amounted to no more than 
3½% of German GDP if services are included.13 
The magnitude is broadly similar when ana -
lysed in terms of value added. This perspective 
takes into account that China also sources from 
other countries products that have undergone 
production stages in Germany. At the same 
time, the contribution of foreign value added 
to the value of German exports is excluded.14 
From a macroeconomic perspective, China is therefore a significant sales market, but not an 
outstanding one. Nevertheless, some manufac -
turing sectors are much more reliant on Chi -
nese demand. These include key areas of the 
German economy such as motor vehicles, 
mechanical engineering, electronics and elec -
trical engineering.
What economic disruptions in China may imply 
for German exports and economic activity can 
be illustrated with the aid of simulation studies, 
ideally using a combination of models: The 
Bundesbank’s own macroeconometric model 
(BbkM- DE) delivers a granular view of the Ger -
man economy,15 while the NiGEM global 
macroeconomic model is used to derive as -
sumptions regarding developments in China 
and the rest of the world.16 In this way, it is 
possible to account not only for the direct im -
plications of changes in Chinese demand but 
also for indirect effects via other trading part -
ners of Germany, commodity prices and mon -
etary policy.17
Past experience in other countries shows that a 
financial or economic crisis in China could se -
verely impair its demand for imports. Episodes 
of excessive credit growth, in particular, have 
resulted in many places in financial crises ac -
companied by severe macroeconomic disrup -
tions. Earlier credit boom- bust episodes saw 
annual investment growth in the affected 
countries decline by 12 percentage points on 
average for two years, while private consump -China: an 
important 
export market 
for Germany, 
but not a 
dominant  oneMacroeconomic 
models …
… allow an 
economic crisis 
in China to be 
simulatedChina's significance for Germany's 
exports*
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 
* Exports  according  to  the  foreign  trade  statistics  based  on 
two-digit codes from the goods directory for production stat-
istics, excluding the product categories that are insignificant for 
deliveries to China or for total German exports (02, 03, 05, 06, 
07, 12, 35) and excluding 89.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16012345678910111213
Share of the respective product category
in total German exports%
Other transport equipmentMachineryMotor vehicles
and partsChina’s share of total German exports
of the respective product category
Electrical
equipment
Computer, electronic
and optical products
Pharmaceutical
productsMetalsFabricated metal products Chemicals and
chemical products
12 See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a).
13 Exports of services to China only play a subordinate role 
from an overall economic perspective; in 2022, they ac -
counted for less than one- fifth of goods exports.
14 This is shown by calculations based on global input-  
output tables, according to which the share of German 
value added consumed in China is 3%. See OECD (2023a).
15 The BbkM- DE model is described in detail in Haertel et 
al. (2022).
16 NiGEM is the global macroeconomic model developed 
by the National Institute of Economic and Social Research 
(NIESR). It models the economies of most OECD countries 
as well as major emerging market economies. International 
linkages are modelled via foreign trade and the interest 
rate/ exchange rate relationship. See also Hantzsche et al. 
(2018).
17 A similar approach was used to quantify the macroeco -
nomic consequences of the war in Ukraine. See Deutsche 
Bundesbank (2022).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
14

tion growth fell by three percentage points on 
average.18 Based on NiGEM simulations, a 
comparable economic downturn would tem -
porarily shrink China’s imports by as much as 
one- fifth compared with a baseline scenario 
absent such a crisis. Foreign demand for Ger -
man goods overall would probably decline by 
no less than just over 2%. Germany’s inter -
national competitiveness would also come 
under pressure from price reductions, particu -
larly by Chinese competitors.
The simulations suggest that the negative spill -
over effects on the German economy would be 
noticeable but manageable. Real GDP in Ger -
many could come in 0.7% lower than other -
wise expected in the first year of the crisis, fol -
lowed by losses of just under 1% in the second 
year. This is largely due to the slump in China 
and subdued demand in the rest of the world. 
The worsened international competitive pos -
ition is less of a factor and its impact comes 
with a lag. The decline in interest rates arising 
in the simulations dampens the impact of the 
shock. However, the easing of monetary policy 
is only moderate because, according to the 
simulations, the dampening effects on the in -
flation rate in the euro area – and also in Ger -
many – will remain limited.
However, more adverse effects on the German 
economy are certainly possible. After all, the 
simulations omit some transmission channels 
that are difficult to model within a one- size- fits- 
all model framework,19 notably the effects of 
increased uncertainty.20 It is equally conceivable 
that Chinese demand for German goods and 
services will experience an even stronger 
slump.21
Imports from China
Germany’s imports from China have soared in 
recent decades. In terms of value, they cur -
rently exceed German exports to China signifi -
cantly.22 In 2022, Germany purchased 13% of 
its global goods imports from China, making China Germany’s most important foreign sup -
plier. The range of imported products is broad, 
comprising not only final products such as 
smartphones, computers and clothing but also 
intermediate inputs, in particular.
There is a high level of dependence on China 
for some intermediate inputs. A large share of 
certain electronic and electrical intermediate in -
puts, including batteries, as well as some raw Fallout manage -
able for German 
economic activ -
ity, simulations 
 suggest, …
… but possibly 
underestimated
China: 
 Germany’s 
most important 
import partnerHigh level of 
dependence, 
especially for 
some intermedi -
ate inputsSimulated impact of an economic crisis in 
China on German real GDP
1.20.90.60.300.3
––––+
Source: Bundesbank calculations using NiGEM and the Bundes-
bank's macro model. 1 Interest rates and exchange rate devel-
opments.  2 Contains direct (foreign trade) and indirect (con-
sumption and investment) effects.
Deutsche BundesbankDeviation from baseline
Monetary policy1
Foreign competitors' prices
Foreign demand 2
Commodity prices
Year 3 Year 2 Year 1Overall
GDP effect
%Contributions in percentage points
18 As shown by studies of 70 economic crises between 
1960 and 2010 in advanced and emerging market econ -
omies that were preceded by excessive credit growth. See 
Abiad et al. (2016).
19 Some of these channels are discussed in Banco de Es -
paña (2023).
20 The uncertainty effects would arguably be severe in par -
ticular if an economic crisis in China coincided with a geo -
political escalation.
21 This is because the simulations do not account for the 
above average import intensity of China’s heavily impaired 
investment. Nor is the particular structure of the range of 
German exports, with its strong focus on capital goods, 
fully accounted for. See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2018).
22 In 2022, Germany’s bilateral foreign trade deficit with 
China amounted to €86 billion. China was thus the country 
that had the largest trade surplus with Germany.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
15

materials such as rare earths, come from 
China.23 China also accounts for a large share 
of imported pharmaceutical ingredients such as 
antibiotics.24 In addition, it is hardly possible to 
switch to other supplier countries for a number 
of products, as China dominates the produc -
tion of these goods worldwide. Dependence on China is particularly pronounced for some 
critical raw materials.25 These are essential, not 
least, for the production of electric engines, 
wind turbines, photovoltaic systems and other 
modern technologies.
A lack of imports of Chinese intermediate in -
puts could give rise to considerable production 
losses in German industry. This risk was high -
lighted amid the temporary disruptions in Chi -
nese goods deliveries during the pandemic. As 
a result of the strict lockdown in parts of China 
at the start of 2020, the German manufactur -
ing sector suffered marked production losses 
(see the box on pp. 17 f.). A representative sur -
vey of German firms conducted by the Bundes -
bank (Bundesbank Online Panel – Firms (BOP- F)) 
last year also points to the high level of de -
pendence on, and difficulty in substituting, es -
sential imports from China.26 According to the 
survey, nearly one out of every two firms in the 
manufacturing sector has been directly or indir -
ectly sourcing essential intermediate inputs 
from China.27 More than 80% of these firms 
reported that it was at least difficult to replace 
essential intermediate inputs. Granted, over 
one- half of the surveyed industrial firms had 
taken measures or planned to do so in the near 
future in order to reduce their dependence. 
However, this is likely to be a complex and 
lengthy process, especially for intermediate in -
puts that are particularly difficult to replace.Lack of imports 
could cause 
considerable 
production 
lossesGermany's important and critical imports 
from China*
5060708090
50 55 60 65 70 75 80Percentage data for 20221
Sources:  Trade  Data  Monitor  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
* HS 6-digit codes that either account for more than 0.1% of 
total German imports or contain critical raw materials. 1 The 
bubble size shows what share of total German imports each 
product category accounts for.
Deutsche BundesbankSmart-
phonesChina's share of 
German imports
China's world market shareBismuthLaptops
Solar panelsRare earths,
scandium 
and yttrium
Magnesium
granules
China's world market share for raw 
materials and final products in areas of 
modern technologies
%
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Source: European Commission (2020).
Deutsche BundesbankLithium-ion batteriesFuel cells/
hydrogen technology
Wind turbines3D printing
Electric motorsPhotovoltaicsRoboticsDronesRaw materials Final products
23 Taiwan also plays a key role as the country of origin for 
German imports of some electronic components, especially 
advanced microprocessors and integrated circuits.
24 See IW Consult (2022).
25 Thirty raw materials for which the European Commis -
sion has identified both a high economic importance and a 
high supply risk are considered critical raw materials. For 
example, China accounts for 60% of global rare earth min -
ing and as much as 90% of global rare earth processing. 
See European Commission (2020).
26 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b).
27 Essential intermediate inputs are goods and services 
without which a relevant part of an enterprise’s production 
processes would cease or could only be carried out subject 
to considerable delays or at greatly reduced quality.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
16

The impact of Chinese supply chain shocks on manufacturing 
in Germany
The spread of the coronavirus in China at 
the beginning of 2020 led to the imposition 
of lockdowns by the Chinese authorities, re-
sulting in a collapse in the country’s indus-
trial output. In February and March 2020 
there was a corresponding material decline 
in Chinese deliveries to Germany. These re-
bounded very strongly in April and May 
2020, despite economic activity in Germany 
also having been severely restricted by this 
stage.1 Later on in the pandemic, imports 
from China grew at a fairly brisk pace until 
China’s zero- COVID strategy led to new 
bottlenecks.
A structural vector autoregressive (SVAR) 
model can be used to illustrate the contri-
bution of China- specifi  c supply chain shocks 
to the evolution of German industrial pro-
duction. Such shocks indicate, for example, 
the disruption in the supply of Chinese 
intermediate goods for German industrial 
production (in the case of the Chinese lock-
downs). However, the approach can also identify shocks caused by higher demand 
in  the German manufacturing sector for 
Chinese intermediate goods (e.g. electronic 
components). The results of this decompos-
ition allow inferences to be drawn about 
which drivers led to supply bottlenecks dur-
ing the pandemic. Both types of supply 
chain shock are identifi  ed using sign restric-
tions on the impulse- response functions.2
According to the estimates, China- specifi  c 
supply chain shocks had a considerable im-
pact on manufacturing output in Germany.3 
For April 2020, around one- quarter of the 
decline in production in Germany can be 
attrib uted to supply chain disruptions in 
China. However, the effects this had were 
already waning by the end of spring 2020, 
mainly owing to China’s rapid reopening, 
1 In addition to the rapid reopening of China’s econ-
omy, the demand in response to the pandemic for 
goods manufactured specifi  cally in China, such as elec-
tronics (and components) for IT and consumer elec-
tronics, but also face masks and protective clothing, 
also played a role. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b).
2 It is assumed that a disruption to the supply of inter-
mediate inputs from China can only partially be offset 
by substituting goods from other countries, resulting in 
cutbacks in production. See Khalil and Weber (2022). 
Supply- type supply chain shocks move Chinese import 
quantities and prices in different directions, while 
demand- type supply chain shocks move them in the 
same direction. The estimation for January 2000 to 
September 2023 takes into account German manufac-
turing output, German imports from China and Ger-
man imports of manufactured goods from the rest of 
the world (seasonally and price- adjusted in each case), 
and the Chinese producer price index (converted into 
euro).
3 Similar analyses also show this to be the case for the 
euro area and the United States. See Deutsche Bundes-
bank (2021c), Khalil and Weber (2022) and European 
Central Bank (2023).The role of Chinese supply chain shocks 
in the evolution of German 
manufacturing output*
3025201510505
––––––+
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
* Based on a SVAR model with four variables and sign  restric-
tions,  estimated  with  data  from  January  2000  to  September 
2023. 1 Percentage changes are approximated using the logar-
ithmic  differences  of  the  series.  2 Supply-type  supply  chain 
shocks move quantities and prices of Chinese imports in differ-
ent directions; demand-type supply chain shocks move them in 
the  same  direction.  3 Comprises  demand  shocks  and  supply 
shocks to domestic industry and the deterministic component.
Deutsche BundesbankChange with respect to December 2019,1 monthly data
Other3China-specific supply chain shocks (supply-type)2China-specific supply chain shocks (demand-type)2
Total (%)Historical contributions of shocks to production ov er time
In percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
17

but also to the higher demand for Chinese 
intermediate goods. Over the further course 
of the pandemic, the heightened demand 
for goods with a large share of Chinese 
value added – which also included pandemic- 
induced demand – actually buoyed German 
production. However, from mid- 2021 on-
wards and in particular in 2022, German in-
dustrial activity was increasingly hampered 
by renewed supply- type supply disruptions 
in China in the wake of the country’s long- 
maintained zero- COVID strategy. These 
shocks made imports more expensive and 
dampened price- adjusted imports from 
China, while at the same time favouring im-
ports from other countries.
Sectors particularly dependent on Chinese 
intermediate inputs suffered signifi  cantly 
larger drops in output in the spring of 2020. 
At the lowest point, in April 2020, their out-
put was around 15% below that of less ex-
posed sectors, as shown by an analysis of granular sectoral data.4 Like the fi  rst analy-
sis, this analysis also indicates a rapid easing 
of the disruption: at the end of 2020 and in 
2021 there were no longer any notable dif-
ferences between the sectors. As of the end 
of 2022, the particularly exposed sectors 
actually outperformed.
All in all, the experience of recent years 
shows that there are advantages to having 
closely integrated supply chains with China, 
but also risks. While the procurement of 
intermediate inputs from China allowed the 
German manufacturing sector to adapt 
quickly to pandemic- related shifts in de-
mand, there were notable production con-
straints as a result of Chinese supply disrup-
tions in the early phase of the pandemic. 
The fact that these constraints were only 
temporary is of little comfort, as the supply 
chain disruption during the pandemic that 
caused them was also only short- lived. Pro-
tracted crises, say as a result of trade em-
bargos, are likely to result in far more ser-
ious consequences.5 Moreover, disruptions 
to imports could lead to more drastic losses 
in output if, in particular, critical and diffi   cult 
to substitute intermediate inputs were to be 
affected.
4 Dependence on Chinese intermediate inputs is 
measured by the share of the costs attributable to im-
ports of intermediate inputs from China in relation to 
the total costs of all intermediate inputs and wages. 
The calculation is based on input- output tables for the 
EU and corresponding import data. According to this 
measure, particularly exposed sectors include the IT 
and electronics industry, textile processing and battery 
manufacturing. Details of the approach can be found 
in Khalil and Weber (2022).
5 According to Khalil and Weber (2022), the longer 
downturn in manufacturing output in the United 
States in 2018-19 can be explained by negative China- 
specifi  c supply chain shocks. These shocks hit the US 
economy in the wake of the US- China trade war. A 
similar development would also be likely for Germany 
and the EU if there were to be protracted disruptions 
in supply chain trade with China.Impact of above average exposure to 
Chinese intermediate inputs on 
manufacturing output*
3020100102030
–––+++
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
* Difference of production in sectors whose dependence on 
Chinese intermediate inputs lies above the median. Estimates 
from January 2019 to September 2023 based on 75 manufac-
turing  sectors.  Transport  goods  production  and  textile  pro-
cessing, which were particularly affected by the German re-
strictions in April 2020, were excluded.
Deutsche Bundesbank%, base period: February 2020
90% confidence bandDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
18

Foreign direct investment 
in China
German firms considerably increased their for -
eign direct investment (FDI) in China. Invest -
ment in China, especially in industry, is likely to 
have been fuelled primarily by efforts to serve a 
large and rapidly growing sales market. In this 
context, producing locally in China has been an 
attractive option in part due to, in some cases, 
high customs barriers. Another factor in Chi -
na’s favour as an investment location has been 
its low labour costs. In 2022, Germany’s out -
ward FDI to China amounted to €11.2 billion.28 
Equity capital thus amounted to €86 billion.
Production locations in China are particularly 
important for the automotive and mechanical 
engineering sectors and the chemicals industry. 
At the end of 2022, the country held 6% of 
Germany’s FDI stocks and was in third place 
behind the United States and Luxembourg, 
which is a major holding location.29 Some sec -
tors concentrated far more heavily on China. 
This is particularly true of the automotive sec -
tor, where almost 30% of FDI is targeted at 
China.30 China is also a major location for Ger -
man FDI in the mechanical engineering sector 
(13%) and the chemicals industry (8%). Chinese 
affiliates were important sources of revenue in 
all of these sectors.31
Investment income from FDI in China is high. In 
2022, the Chinese affiliates of German groups 
generated a profit of €23 billion, around half of 
which was reinvested in China. That means 
that 15% of Germany’s global investment in -
come was generated from FDI in China. This 
figure has risen significantly in recent years, 
making it higher than the 12% share of global 
revenue generated by foreign affiliates in China 
and the 4% share of global equity investment 
in China.32 This suggests that investing in China 
is very lucrative for the firms involved.
It is most likely against this backdrop, too, that 
German enterprises maintained their level of in -
vestment in China until recently, despite the heightened geopolitical risks. This is also re -
flected in the profits of German firms reinvested 
in China. In 2021, these rose sharply – and with 
them equity investment.33 From the second 
quarter of 2022 to the third quarter of 2023, 
too, German enterprises continued to reinvest 
their profits in China. One reason for reinvest -
ing profits could be the strict regulation of FDI 
in China. In the same period, however, other China is an 
attractive destin -
ation of German 
foreign  direct 
investment, …
… particularly in 
automotive and 
mechanical 
engineering 
sectors 
FDI highly profit -
able so farUnlike other 
foreign  firms, 
German firms 
reinvest their 
profits in ChinaGerman foreign direct investment by 
sector in key regions*
020406080
* Sector classification based on declaration of foreign affiliates 
worldwide. Indirect and direct investment. US data are current 
only up to the end of 2019 for the automotive sector.
Deutsche Bundesbank€ bn, data for 2021
EU ChinaUnited
StatesManufacture of
chemicals and
chemical products
Manufacture of
motor vehicles,
trailers and
semi-trailersMachinery and
equipment
28 Given the heightened geopolitical risks and the fact that 
complaints about China becoming less attractive as an in -
vestment location have been mounting for some time now, 
the recent rise comes as quite a surprise. It is sometimes 
assumed that German firms are increasingly setting up 
“closed- loop” production lines in China, one reason for this 
being the hope that they could continue operating in the 
event of a conflict, as they would then be able to cope 
without flows of goods from the West. See Südekum 
(2022).
29 For most other euro area countries, the percentage of 
total foreign investment accounted for by China is lower.
30 This high level of investment is explained by the fact 
that the Chinese passenger car market is the largest in the 
world. Moreover, car imports in China were subject to high 
tariffs for a long time. The joint venture requirement for 
foreign manufacturers to enter the market was recently 
largely eliminated.
31 Data from the Microdatabase Direct investment (MiDi) 
for 2021 – the most recent data available – show that, in 
the automotive sector, Chinese group units contributed 
30% to the annual revenue of all foreign affiliates world -
wide.
32 Based on data on Germany’s net direct investment pos -
ition. Equity capital differs from total FDI in that the latter 
also includes intra- group loans.
33 Generally speaking, profits generated by German affili -
ates abroad in 2021 were up sharply on the crisis year of 
2020.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
19

foreign enterprises withdrew US$160 billion in 
profits from China.34
Indirect dependences
Even firms with no direct ties to China could 
suffer in the event of an escalation of an eco -
nomic or geopolitical conflict with the West. 
This is suggested by the BOP- F survey of more 
than 7,000 German firms for the months of 
April to June 2023. Around 60% of the sur -
veyed firms believe that an escalation of eco -
nomic or geopolitical tensions between China 
and western economies resulting in new trade barriers and restrictions on FDI would have a 
negative impact on their business activities. A 
lack of imports of intermediate inputs would 
have a negative impact on just over one in ten 
German enterprises.35 By comparison, declines 
in exports or own production in China would 
be particularly problematic for very few com -
panies. Many enterprises (42%) would suffer 
mainly due to the heightened uncertainty 
about future economic developments that such 
a conflict would entail. Among these are nu -
merous firms with no direct dependence on 
Chinese imports. Enterprises with no business 
in China could also be affected by such an es -
calation via other transmission channels. A col -
lapse of deliveries of Chinese intermediate in -
puts to intermediate goods manufacturers 
could have an impact on downstream produc -
tion stages in Germany. It could also create 
risks for the German financial system, thereby 
worsening financing conditions.
Risks as a result of Germany’s 
financial  ties with China
The German financial system may be vulnerable 
to risks from its exposure to China through vari -
ous channels. First, German financial institu -
tions maintain direct relationships with Chinese 
borrowers. Second, indirect risks to the Ger -
man banking system could arise from bank 
loans to domestic enterprises and sectors that 
depend heavily on China. In addition, other 
financial system stakeholders, such as insur -
ance corporations or investment funds, could 
also have direct and indirect ties with China.
Materialisation 
of risks posed 
by China will 
probably impact 
economy as a 
wholeVarious stability 
risks facing 
German  finan -
cial systemEconomic indicators for German foreign 
direct investment in China*
246810121416
2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22
* Relative to the corresponding economic indicators of all for-
eign affiliates worldwide.
Deutsche Bundesbank%
Equity capitalInvestment income
Sales
German equity capital (transactions) 
abroad by region
1 Preliminary data for 2023 only up to and including October.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 2320020406080100120
–++++++€ bn
China EU United States
1
34 See Douglas and Soon (2023).
35 This mainly affects enterprises in the manufacturing sec -
tor.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
20

The banking sector’s direct 
financial  exposure
The size of domestic banks’ direct exposure to 
Chinese borrowers is limited.36 It stood at €36 
billion at the end of 2022. The total direct ex -
posure to China amounts to 1.25% of the 
banking system’s total exposure to all non-  
financial corporations and 0.1% of its total ex -
posure to all customer groups.37 The largest 
customer groups in China were credit institu -
tions (€18 billion), enterprises and households 
(€11 billion) and public authorities (€7 billion). 
Compared with borrowers from other coun -
tries, the exposure to China ranks just 20th in 
terms of total amounts borrowed. This has not 
changed in recent years.
The total direct exposure of most single banks 
to China is not particularly large, either. Meas -
ured in terms of common equity tier 1 (CET1) 
capital, the direct risks posed by Chinese bor -
rowers to more significantly exposed institu -
tions are limited.38 The few exceptions include, 
in particular, single branches of Chinese banks 
and single institutions classified as “other com -
mercial banks”.
As for other countries, banks’ exposure to 
China plays a much greater role. According to 
the Bank for International Settlements,39 the 
United Kingdom is a particularly prominent ex -
ample. At the end of the reference period, its 
exposure stood at €238 billion.40 Within the 
euro area, French banks, in particular, were 
comparatively highly exposed to China.41
The banking sector’s indirect 
financial exposure
Economic ties with China pose significant risks 
to the German banking system. In a crisis scen -
ario, financial exposure to German borrowers 
who invest particularly actively in China would 
probably be adversely affected. These would 
include enterprises with a high level of FDI in 
China. However, there are also risks associated with the strong focus of export business on 
China or dependence on important intermedi -
ate inputs.German banks’ 
direct exposure 
to China is 
limited
Only a few 
institutions  are 
notably exposed
Direct vulner -
ability moderate 
by international 
standards, too
By contrast, sig -
nificant indirect 
risks to German 
banks, …Short-term impact of a conflict with 
China on the activity of German firms*
Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  the  Bundesbank 
Online  Panel  –  Firms  (BOP-F)  survey  conducted  in  Q2  2023. 
Representative data based on a sample of 7,333 firms. * Ques-
tion: Imagine a scenario in which economic or geopolitical ten-
sions  between  China  and  the  West  (including  the  European 
Union) escalate over the coming months, leading to new trade 
barriers and restrictions on [foreign] direct investment. What 
impact would this have on your enterprise’s business activities?
Deutsche Bundesbank0 10 20 30 40Response percentages
Negative due to greater 
economic uncertainty
Negative due to 
discontinuation of 
production in ChinaPositiveNegative due to loss 
of exportsNegative due to loss 
of intermediate inputsNeither negative 
nor positive
36 This is the total exposure in the credit register for loans 
of €1 million or more. Pursuant to Section 14 of the Bank -
ing Act (Kreditwesengesetz) , loans of €1 million or more 
comprise on- balance- sheet and off- balance- sheet transac -
tions. Off- balance- sheet transactions include, amongst 
other things, warranties, guarantees and derivatives as well 
as undrawn revocable and irrevocable lending commit -
ments. The exposures also include loans to Chinese- based 
affiliates of German enterprises and intra- group loans.
37 The exposure amount is moderately higher when Hong 
Kong and Taiwan are also included. These exposures 
amounted to €13.5 billion and €4.5 billion, respectively, at 
the end of 2022.
38 Supervisors focus particularly on institutions’ CET1 cap -
ital. It consists of paid- in capital instruments that have to 
fulfil certain requirements as well as disclosed reserves.
39 Consolidated Banking Statistics data are available for 31 
countries. Exposures are reported on a guarantor basis for 
the end of 2022.
40 On top of this, exposure to Hong Kong amounted to 
€513 billion. The London- based big banks HSBC and Stand -
ard Chartered are likely to play an important role in this.
41 In absolute terms, however, France’s total exposure was 
also limited, at €45 billion. Germany comes to €19 billion 
on a comparable basis.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
21

The German banking system’s total exposure to 
firms that relatively actively engage in FDI in 
China is large. This conclusion can be drawn 
from analyses linking microdata for enterprises 
and banks. At the end of 2022, domestic banks’ 
exposure to firms making these investments 
stood at nearly €220 billion, corresponding to six times the direct exposure to borrowers domiciled 
in China and almost 42% of aggregate CET1 
capital. The total exposure of other systemically 
important institutions (O-  SIIs),42 in particular, is 
comparatively large (see the box on pp. 24f.).
German banks are also relatively highly exposed 
to individual sectors for which China is an im -
portant export market.43 These include the 
manufacture of machinery and equipment, 
metal production and processing and, in terms 
of services, water and air transport. The import -
ance of Chinese demand for domestic value 
added is greatest in these sectors.44 At the end 
of 2022, the banking system’s exposures to en -
terprises in these sectors amounted to around 
€140 billion. For the average systemically im -
portant bank, exposure came to around 40% of 
tier 1 capital. Averaged across all institutions, 
the figure was significantly lower, at 5%.
The total exposure to firms in sectors that are 
comparatively heavily dependent on imports of 
Chinese intermediate products is also relatively 
high. Dependence on Chinese intermediate in -
puts is particularly pronounced in the textiles 
and clothing sectors, in computers, electronic 
and optical products, electrical equipment, and 
in fishing and aquaculture.45 Total exposure to 
… due, amongst 
other things, to 
large exposure 
to enterprises 
investing in 
ChinaBanks also 
exposed to sec -
tors with high 
dependences on 
China in terms 
of exports …
… and importsAggregate direct exposure to China by 
category of bank
0510152025
1 For reasons of statistical anonymity, it was necessary to con-
solidate the “Derivatives” and “Other off-balance-sheet transac-
tions” items. 2 Comprises the 16 other systemically important in-
stitutions (O-SIIs) in Germany. 3 Comprises all other non-O-SIIs in 
Germany.
Deutsche Bundesbank€ bn, as at Q4 2022
LSIs3O-SIIs2Derivatives and other off-balance-sheet transaction s1
On-balance-sheet credit exposures
Distribution of direct exposure to China 
in the domestic banking system
Source: Credit register of loans of €1 million or more. 1 Com-
prises the 16 other systemically important institutions (O-SIIs) in 
Germany.
Deutsche Bundesbank051015202530As a percentage of CET1, Q4 2022
5th percentile95th percentile
25th percentile75th percentileMedian O-SIIs1
MedianAverage
Average O-SIIs142 Banks that are important to the functioning of a coun -
try’s national economy. The Federal Financial Supervisory 
Authority (BaFin) and the Deutsche Bundesbank are jointly 
responsible for identifying German O-  SIIs, taking note of 
the relevant guidelines published by the European Banking 
Authority (EBA). For a list of banks currently classified as 
O- SIIs for Germany, see https://www.bafin.de/EN/Aufsicht/
BankenFinanzdienstleister/Eigenmittelanforderungen/ASRI/
asri_node_en.html
43 Due to insufficient data, it is impossible to determine 
individual enterprises’ dependence on exports or imports 
from China. As an alternative, the focus here is therefore 
on entire sectors for which China has comparatively large 
significance in terms of exports or imports.
44 This is determined based on OECD data for 2020 (see 
OECD (2023a)). The sectors are ranked based on the per -
centage of a sector’s domestic value added that is con -
sumed in China. Specifically, for the 10% of sectors with 
the highest value added share, Chinese final demand is 
classed as being particularly significant.
45 This is reflected in Chinese intermediate inputs making 
up a large percentage of total imported intermediate 
goods. The reference dataset is once again the OECD (see 
OECD (2023b)), with the 10% of sectors where China 
makes up the largest share of domestic and foreign inputs 
being considered here.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
22

these sectors amounted to €92 billion at the 
end of 2022. Systemically important banks had 
exposures, on average, to the tune of just 
under one- fifth of their tier 1 capital, compared 
with an average of 5.5% across all institutions.
These results should be treated with caution. 
The calculations include total claims against ex -
posed enterprises and sectors. This tends to 
overestimate the associated risks. After all, it is 
not clear what proportion of the affected ex -
posures would have to be written off in an eco -
nomic downturn scenario or if geopolitical ten -
sions were to escalate. Moreover, the results 
are heavily dependent on how the enterprises 
concerned are defined.46 In the absence of 
suitable data, indirect financial risks resulting 
from potential dependences on imports or ex -
ports can be analysed only on a sectoral basis. 
However, there could well be firms with far 
above average dependences in sectors that are 
not classed as particularly vulnerable overall.47 
In addition, even where import shares are low 
in terms of their value, dependency may be 
high if imports cannot be sourced from other 
countries. Moreover, the results point to poten -
tial major contagion effects in a risk scenario as 
the exposed firms are highly interconnected 
with the real economy.48 To round out the list, 
analyses show that banks in Germany provide 
much financing to the foreign special-  purpose 
vehicles (SPVs) of multinational companies.49 It 
is unclear to what extent the latter use these 
vehicles to channel further debt capital to 
China. This could render German banks’ actual 
loss potential significantly greater in an adverse 
scenario.Extent of indir -
ect risks to the 
stability of the 
banking system 
can only be 
approximatedAggregate indirect exposure to China by 
category of bank*
020406080100120
* Domestic  enterprises  are  classified  as  being  particularly  ex-
posed  to  China  if  one  of  the  following  key  figures  –  sales, 
equity, total assets or headcount – of their foreign affiliates in 
China exceeds a threshold of 10% of all foreign affiliates world-
wide. 1 Comprises the 16 other systemically important institu-
tions (O-SIIs) in Germany. 2 Comprises all other non-O-SII insti-
tutions in Germany.
Deutsche Bundesbank€ billion, as at Q4 2022
LSIs2O-SIIs1Derivatives
Other off-balance-sheet transactions
On-balance-sheet credit exposures
Distribution of indirect exposure to 
China in the domestic banking system*
* Domestic enterprises are classified as being particularly ex-
posed  to  China  if  one  of  the  following  key  figures  –  sales, 
equity, total assets or headcount – of their foreign affiliates in 
China  exceeds  a  threshold  of  10%  of  all  foreign  affiliates 
worldwide. 1 Comprises the 16 other systemically important 
institutions (O-SIIs) in Germany.
Deutsche Bundesbank010203040506070As a percentage of CET1, as at Q4 2022
5th percentile25th percentile75th percentile95th percentile
Average
MedianMedian O-SIIs1
Average O-SIIs1
46 For more information on the sensitivity of the results to 
the definition of the enterprises affected, see pp. 24 f.
47 One indication that this could be the case is that con -
siderably more firms usually entertain trade ties with China 
than have FDI there.
48 This is evidenced by analyses of what are known as 
groups of connected clients, also referred to as borrower 
units. These are enterprises that are legally and/ or econom -
ically independent borrowers but are nevertheless closely 
interconnected in legal and/ or economic terms, e.g. 
through (material) ownership stakes (≥ 50%), profit trans -
fer agreements etc.
49 See also the box on pp. 24 f.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
23

Risks to fi  nancial stability in Germany on account of fi  rms 
active in China
Disruptions in relations with China would 
potentially have severe repercussions for 
German fi  rms heavily invested in that coun-
try. Should they put those fi  rms’ solvency at 
risk, this could also pull the German bank-
ing system into the vortex. One way of 
measuring such vulnerabilities is to link stat-
istical and supervisory reporting databases.
Risks to domestic fi  rms from their exposure 
to China are assessed through the amount 
of their FDI in that country. Information on 
this is provided by the Deutsche Bundes-
bank’s Microdatabase Direct investment 
(MiDi). Domestic fi  rms are classifi  ed as 
being particularly exposed to China if a high 
weight is assigned to Chinese foreign sub-
sidiaries held directly or indirectly (via hold-
ing companies). To qualify, these fi  rms’ Chi-nese subsidiaries have to account for at 
least 10% of sales, equity capital, total 
assets or headcount of all foreign affi   liates 
worldwide. As at end- 2022, 756 fi  rms fi  t 
the bill.
Information on German banks’ fi  nancial ex-
posures to domestic fi  rms with a high 
weight of Chinese foreign affi   liates is based 
on data from the credit register for loans of 
€1 million or more. The dataset contains 
both on- balance- sheet and off- balance- 
sheet transactions between individual banks 
and fi  rms which are merged into total ex-
posures. On- balance- sheet transactions in-
clude lending, whereas warranties, guaran-
tees and derivatives are some of the types 
of transactions reported as off- balance- 
sheet.1 Information from the reporting sys-
tem for loans of €1 million or more can be 
linked to bank balance sheet data, which 
are subject to supervisory reporting require-
ments. In this manner, information on 
banks’ common equity tier 1 (CET1) capital2 
and risk- weighted assets (RWAs)3 can be 
taken into account. Moreover, the data 
allow a distinction to be made between ex-
posures of other systemically important in-
1 Starting with the 31 March 2019 reporting reference 
date, the defi  nition of credit was expanded. Since 
then, off- balance- sheet transactions have also in-
cluded undrawn revocable and irrevocable lending 
commitments.
2 Supervisors focus particularly on institutions’ CET1 
capital. It consists of paid- in capital instruments which 
have to fulfi  l certain requirements as well as disclosed 
reserves. Both components must be available to insti-
tutions for unrestricted and immediate use to cover 
risks or losses. Institutions must have a CET1 capital 
ratio of at least 4.5%. Capital buffer requirements also 
have to be met using CET1 capital.
3 RWAs are a measure of a bank’s risk.Aggregate indirect exposure to China by 
threshold*
050100150200250300350400
* Domestic  enterprises  are  classified  as  being  particularly  ex-
posed  to  China  if  one  of  the  following  key  figures  –  sales, 
equity, total assets or headcount – of their foreign affiliates in 
China exceeds a threshold of 10%, 25%, 50% or 0% of  all for-
eign affiliates worldwide (accordingly includes all  firms with affil-
iates in China).
Deutsche Bundesbank€ billion, as at Q4 2022
Threshold50% 25% 10% 0%Derivatives
Other off-balance-
sheet transactions
On-balance-sheet credit exposuresDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
24

stitutions (O- SIIs) and those of less signifi  -
cant institutions (LSIs).4
Overall, the German banking system has 
high total exposures to fi  rms invested in 
China. In recent years, these exposures 
have risen signifi  cantly, consistent with Ger-
man fi  rms’ growing business ties with 
China. At the end of 2022, domestic banks’ 
exposures stood at nearly €220 billion, rep-
resenting almost 7% of RWAs and nearly 
42% of CET1 capital. At last report, around 
half was accounted for by off- balance- sheet 
transactions, a very high share in terms of 
German banks’ general balance sheet struc-
ture.
Systemically important banks are particu-
larly exposed. Their median exposures 
amounted to more than 50% of CET1 cap-
ital, with off- balance- sheet transactions 
playing a dominant role. The same holds for 
exposures of smaller branches of foreign 
banks. By contrast, savings banks account 
for almost half of on- balance- sheet credit 
exposures.
The funding of foreign special- purpose ve-
hicles (SPVs)5 by domestic banks can poten-
tially entail additional risks. Total exposures 
to these entities, at €163 billion in the fi  nal 
quarter of 2020, were almost as high as 
those to domestic multinational enterprises 
(€208 billion).6 By comparison, direct ex-
posure to their subsidiaries in China, at €14 
billion as at end- 2020, was relatively small. 
Part of the China- related total exposure, 
though, could have been rerouted via lend-
ing to SPVs and thus hidden. However, a 
more detailed analysis of this channel that 
looks through the fi  nancial fl  ows routed via 
such cross- border relationships between 
fi  rms is next to impossible.
The quantifi  cation of indirect vulnerabilities 
is highly uncertain. One reason lies in the high stock of, in some cases, opaque off- 
balance- sheet exposures of the banking 
system. Another is that there is already size-
able discretionary scope for defi  ning the 
group of potentially vulnerable fi  rms. The 
stricter the criteria applied here are, the 
lower the banking system’s calculated total 
exposure will be. It falls to one- half if the 
threshold for sales, equity capital, total 
assets or headcount attributable to Chinese 
foreign affi   liates is raised from 10% to 50%. 
On the other hand, if all fi  rms with affi   liates 
in China are included, the total exposure 
nearly doubles. That said, though, it is pre-
cisely from this perspective that it is unlikely 
that total exposures to the affected fi  rms 
would have to be written off as, if Chinese 
business were less important, the fi  rm’s fu-
ture as a going concern would tend not to 
be jeopardised even if the risk were to ma-
terialise. However, fi  rms not interlinked with 
China through subsidiaries of their own can 
likewise be exposed to elevated risks if, say, 
they are linked through long- term equity in-
vestments to other fi  rms that themselves 
have injected large volumes of FDI into 
China.7
4 The Federal Financial Supervisory Authority (BaFin) 
and the Deutsche Bundesbank are jointly responsible 
for identifying German O- SIIs, taking note of the rele-
vant guidelines published by the European Banking 
Authority (EBA). See https://www.bafin.de/EN/Aufsicht/
BankenFinanzdienstleister/Eigenmittelanforderungen/
ASRI/asri_artikel_en.html
5 A special- purpose vehicle (SPV) is a fi  rm established 
to serve a clearly defi  ned business purpose. SPVs are 
deployed primarily for fi  nancing instruments going 
above and beyond traditional lending.
6 We are looking here at domestic multinational enter-
prises (group parents) which simultaneously have a 
non- resident SPV and an affi   liate in China.
7 This is shown by an analysis of groups of connected 
clients made up of legally or economically affi   liated 
fi  rms. It is assumed here that the entire group is ex-
posed if at least one of the affi   liated fi  rms is active in 
China via FDI. Applying this very broad defi  nition, just 
under 52,000 fi  rms would be affected and the total 
exposure of the banking system would amount to 
around €2.4 trillion.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
25

Other financial exposures
Domestic open- end investment funds and in -
surers have little direct exposure to China; the 
indirect risks are moderate. The total direct ex -
posure of open-  end investment funds and in -
surers to China amounted to €5 billion and 
€8.4 billion respectively at the end of 2022.50 
However, open- end investment funds held €54 
billion worth of shares in enterprises that ap -
pear potentially at risk due to having foreign 
affiliates in China, and insurers had investments 
amounting to €48 billion in such enterprises (in 
both cases, on an entity or ultimate- parent 
basis).
Conclusion
Overall, the German economy is heavily de -
pendent on China. China is important for sig -
nificant parts of German industry, be it as a 
sales market, a production centre or a source 
of intermediate goods. Germany appears more 
vulnerable to disruptions in economic relations 
with China than most other euro area countries 
or the United States, partly because industry is 
of greater significance to the economy as a 
whole in Germany.
An economic crisis in China similar to those 
that have occurred in the past in other coun -
tries following a correction of excessive credit 
growth would arguably be manageable for the 
German economy. However, an abrupt de -
coupling, say as a result of a geopolitical crisis, 
would deal a considerable blow to German in -
dustry, in particular. Enterprises that are directly 
invested in China, which are typically large, 
would stand to lose a substantial part of their 
sales and profit base. The number of firms that 
depend directly or indirectly on critical inter -
mediate inputs from China is much larger. A 
lack of imports could cause them to experience 
serious production losses, at least in the short 
term. In German industry, which is character -
ised by a high degree of division of labour, this 
would probably also impact downstream pro -duction stages. In addition, there would be 
spillover effects that would trigger similar prob -
lems in other economies. The heightened un -
certainty associated with this would likely mean 
that all sectors of the German economy would 
be affected. Overall, the economic losses would 
arguably clearly eclipse the costs of the exten -
sive decoupling from Russia.
The close real economic ties between Germany 
and China also give rise to considerable risks 
for the German financial system. While the dir -
ect interconnectedness of German financial 
intermediaries with China is fairly small, Ger -
man banks are highly exposed to domestic en -
terprises and sectors that are heavily depend -
ent on China. A far- reaching disruption to Sino- 
German economic relations would impact 
these firms and sectors significantly and ultim -
ately increase the probability of credit defaults. 
In addition, the German financial system would 
likely face further strains in such a scenario. 
These could, for example, be the result of a 
general loss of confidence in the global finan -
cial markets.
When analysing these risks, the benefits of 
close ties with China should also be taken into 
account, however. In recent years, German in -
dustrial enterprises have derived significant 
financial benefit from exports to China. In add -
ition, they have generated high sales and 
profits from production in China. The large vol -
ume of imports from China has likewise been 
beneficial for Germany. A decoupling from 
China is therefore likely to entail business and 
economic costs over the medium and long 
term. This would be true even if dependences 
were reduced in an orderly and gradual man -
ner.51 The economy would likely suffer particu -
larly large losses if production were “reshored” Risks for insurers 
and investment 
funds moderate
Overall, the 
German  econ -
omy is heavily 
dependent on 
China
Abrupt decoup -
ling, in particu -
lar, likely to be 
very costly for 
the economyFinancial system 
also potentially 
at risk
However, 
Germany  also 
benefits from 
close economic 
ties with China
50 At the end of 2022, the aggregate net asset value of 
domestic open- end investment funds stood at around 
€2,500 billion, while German insurers held investments to -
talling €2,014 billion at market values at the same point in 
time.
51 See Baqaee et al. (2023).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
26

to Germany on a broad scale.52 In addition, 
China has a strong position in or even a quasi- 
monopoly for some products, meaning de -
pendences can be reduced at best in the me -
dium to long term.
It should also be taken into account that mu -
tual dependences entail fewer risks than unilat -
eral dependences. Granted, the stocks of Chi -
nese FDI in Germany are very low so far. None -
theless, China, too, sources important inter -
mediate goods from Germany. Only a small 
proportion of total Chinese exports of goods 
(3%) goes to Germany, but looking at the G7 
group (including the EU), this share rises to 
40%. Overall, China is heavily dependent on 
the advanced economies for trade and tech -
nologies.53
Consequently, a unilateral decoupling from 
China appears neither realistic nor desirable 
overall. However, firms and policymakers 
should continue to do all they can to reduce 
risks and strengthen the resilience of the Ger -man economy (de- risking). Strengthening the 
international trade order and regional free 
trade agreements that make it easier for enter -
prises to diversify international supply relation -
ships can make a contribution. The Federal 
Government’s strategy on China54 and the 
European Commission’s measures to reduce 
dependence on critical raw materials point in 
the right direction.55 It also seems relevant for 
financial institutions to keep an eye on indirect 
vulnerabilities that may arise through borrow -
ers’ business activities.Moreover, 
dependences 
also on the 
Chinese  side
Resilience 
should therefore 
be strengthened, 
but decoupling 
not advisable
List of references
Abiad, A., M. Lee, M. Pundit and A. Ramayandi (2016), Moderating Growth and Structural Change 
in the People’s Republic of China: Implications for Developing Asia and Beyond, ADB Briefs, No 53.
Banco de España (2023), The potential global effects and transmission channels of a slowdown in 
Chinese growth, Economic Bulletin, 2023/ Q4, Article No 6.
Baqaee, D., J. Hinz, B. Moll, M. Schularick, F. A. Teti, J. Wanner and S. Yang (2023), What if? The 
Effects of a Hard Decoupling from China on the German Economy, Kiel Institute for the World 
Economy, policy article, December 2023.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a), Economic developments in emerging market economies: old prob -
lems and new challenges, Monthly Report, July 2023, pp. 57-69.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b), The significance of China as a supplier of critical intermediate in -
puts to German firms, Monthly Report, September 2023, pp. 21f.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022), Potential macroeconomic consequences of the war in Ukraine – 
simulations based on a severe risk scenario, Monthly Report, April 2022, pp. 13-29.52 See, for instance, Fuest et al. (2022).
53 See Gerards Iglesias and Matthes (2023).
54 Amongst other things, the paper calls on companies to 
take greater account of geopolitical risks in their decision- 
making. Cluster risks should be internalised to prevent the 
government from having to intervene in the event of a 
geopolitical crisis. This is particularly important given that 
several large firms have extensive exposures. See Federal 
Government (2023).
55 The Critical Raw Materials Act recently passed by the 
Council and the European Parliament stipulates, amongst 
other things, that as of 2030 not more than 65% of the 
EU’s annual consumption of each strategic raw material 
may be sourced from a single third country. See European 
Commission (2023).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
27

Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a), The potential effects of a sharp downturn on the Chinese real 
estate  market, Monthly Report, November 2021, pp. 14 f.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b), The reasons for the Chinese economy’s comparatively good per -
formance in the pandemic, Monthly Report, October 2021, pp. 46 f.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021c), The role of the disruption of Chinese supply chains in production 
slumps in the United States and the EU in spring 2020, Monthly Report, October 2021, pp. 52-54.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020), Consequences of increasing protectionism, Monthly Report, January 
2020, pp. 45-66.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), The realignment of the Chinese economy and its global implica -
tions, Monthly Report, July 2018, pp. 39-56.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2014), The potential effects of a downturn in the Chinese housing market 
on the real economy, Monthly Report, August 2014, pp. 17 ff.
DiPippo, G., I. Mazzocco and S. Kennedy (2022), Red Ink: Estimating Chinese Industrial Policy 
Spending in Comparative Perspective, Center for Strategic and International Studies, A Joint Report 
of the CSIS Economics Program & Trustee Chair in Chinese Business and Economics.
Douglas, J. and W. Soon (2023), Foreign Firms Pull Billions in Earnings Out of China, The Wall 
Street Journal, 6 November 2023, available at https://www.wsj.com/world/china/foreign- firms-  
pull-billions-in-earnings-out-of-china-0423b68a  (paywall).
European Central Bank (2023), The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking per -
spective: Challenges to the monetary policy landscape from a changing geopolitical environment, 
Occasional Paper, No 311.
European Commission (2023), Critical Raw Materials: ensuring secure and sustainable supply 
chains for EU’s green and digital future, press release, 16 March 2023, available at https://ec.
europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_23_1661
European Commission (2020), Critical Raw Materials Resilience: Charting a Path towards greater 
Security and Sustainability, Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the 
Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions, 
3 September 2020, available at https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:  
52020DC0474
Federal Government (2023), Strategy on China of the Government of the Federal Republic of Ger -
many.
Fuest, C., L. Flach, F. Dorn and L. Scheckenhofer (2022), Geopolitical Challenges and their Conse -
quences for the German Economic Model, ifo Institut, study for the Bavarian Business Association 
(Vereinigung der bayerischen Wirtschaft e. V.).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
28

Gerards Iglesias, S. and J. Matthes (2023), China’s dependence on the West for imports and tech -
nologies, German Economic Institute, Report, No 15/ 2023.
Haertel, T., B. Hamburg and V. Kusin (2022), The macroeconometric model of the Bundesbank 
revisited, Deutsche Bundesbank Technical Paper No 01/ 2022.
Hantzsche, A., M. Lopresto and G. Young (2018), Using NiGEM in Uncertain Times: Introduction 
and Overview of NiGEM, National Institute Economic Review, Vol. 244 (1), pp. R1- R14.
Horn, S., B. Parks, C. Reinhart and C. Trebesch (2023), China as an International Lender of Last 
Resort, NBER Working Paper, No w31105.
International Monetary Fund (2023a), Global Financial Stability Report: Financial and Climate 
Policies  for a High- Interest- Rate Era, October 2023.
International Monetary Fund (2023b), World Economic Outlook: Navigating Global Divergences, 
October 2023.
IW Consult (2022), Resilienz pharmazeutischer Lieferketten, German Economic Institute, study for 
the Association of Research- Based Pharmaceutical Companies ( Verband Forschender Arzneimittel -
hersteller  e. V.), March 2022.
Khalil, M. and M.-D. Weber (2022), Chinese supply chain shocks, Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion 
Paper No 44/ 2022.
OECD (2023a), 1. TIVA 2023 ed. Principal Indicators, available at https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx? 
DataSetCode=TIVA_2022_C1
OECD (2023b), OECD Inter- Country Input- Output (ICIO) Tables, available at https://www.oecd.org/
sti/ind/inter-country-input-output-tables.htm
Südekum, J. (2022), Der Schrecken des Taiwanszenarios, taz, 17 December 2022, available at 
https://taz.de/Internationale-Handelspolitik/!5900316 /Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
29

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
30

The outlook for cash – a systematic look at 
the future of cash
The Bundesbank has a statutory mandate to supply cash in Germany. As part of the Eurosystem’s 
cash strategy, it is committed to ensuring that euro banknotes and coins remain attractive, avail -
able and generally accepted as a form of payment and a store of value. To do so, it must also 
analyse the underlying conditions influencing the future of cash.
The “Cash of the future” study commissioned by the Bundesbank takes a systematic look at the 
opportunities and challenges awaiting cash in the medium to long- term future. The study con -
structs three exploratory scenarios for the future of cash. The scenarios describe alternative devel -
opments for cash and its environment in Germany up to 2037. Although the scenarios are intrin -
sically plausible and logical images of the future, they are not forecasts. The scenarios allow 
insight to be gained into the factors shaping the future of cash and their potential effects. They 
incorporate diverse perspectives and their results can be incorporated into strategic decision-  
making.
The scenario “The hyperdigital payment world – artificially intelligent, convenient and vulnerable” 
describes a highly digitalised and thus vulnerable world in which cash plays only a minor role. 
The scenario “A cash renaissance payment world – smart, self- determined and resilient” posits a 
partial reversion to cash and its advantages. In this scenario, the use of cash is declining only 
slowly. The scenario “The vanishing hybrid payment world – pluralistic, segregated and indiffer -
ent” describes a hybrid payment landscape characterised by a shift towards greater individuality 
of living standards, increasing complexity and advancing digitalisation. In this scenario, cash is 
one means of payment among many, the use of which is steadily declining without any objection 
from society or government. Although the scenarios describe different payment environments, 
cash is used in all three scenarios, albeit to varying degrees and for different purposes. Based on 
the data collected, a world without cash does not appear plausible within the next 15 to 20 
years. In all three scenarios, however, access to cash deteriorates and its acceptance and use 
decrease. The speed and strength of this decline vary. Although each scenario technically features 
free choice of means of payment, in practice, this choice is no longer guaranteed in two out of 
the three scenarios, and the stabilising function of cash in times of crisis is also at risk.
The social importance of cash is high owing to its unique combination of characteristics. The 
scenarios clearly show that cash handlers and politicians must act in order to ensure that all 
members of the public have genuine freedom of choice in means of payment and to safeguard 
the stabilising function of cash. As a central, neutral player in the cash cycle, the Bundesbank will 
be involved in shaping payment transactions in Germany in a forward- looking manner, with the 
aim of ensuring that cash continues to be available in the future.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
31

Cash today
Cash usage in Germany remains at a high level, 
even by international standards.1 However, 
studies on payment behaviour document a 
steady decline in cash payments,2 while cash -
less payment methods are becoming more di -
verse and popular. They have also been increas -
ingly accepted in previous strongholds of cash 
use,3 especially since the coronavirus pandemic. 
In addition, digitally savvy consumers are in -
creasingly paying via their smartphones or 
smart watches.4 The Bundesbank supports 
people’s freedom to choose how they want to 
pay. From a societal perspective, for reasons of 
social inclusion and crisis prevention, it is im -
perative that people continue to have the op -
portunity to use cash. To this end, euro bank -
notes and coins must remain available and be 
generally accepted.
Empirical analyses have so far rated public ac -
cess to cash as good. For example, in the Bun -
desbank’s survey on payment behaviour in Ger -
many, 94% of respondents considered the out -
lay associated with making withdrawals from 
ATMs or bank counters to be low or very low.5 
An analysis of the spatial distribution and avail -
ability of withdrawal locations currently shows 
a dense network of cash access points. At the 
same time, the number of ATMs and bank 
counters has declined in recent years.6 Reports 
on the closure of bank branches and disman -
tled ATMs as well as the first branches that no 
longer accept cash deposits are regularly pub -
lished in the media.7 Moreover, even if the net -
work of cash access points is objectively dense, 
the individual effort and cost of withdrawing 
cash may be increased. ATMs often charge for 
cash withdrawals, for example when the ma -
chine does not belong to the banking associ -
ation of the account- carrying bank. Users who 
want to circumvent this usually have to take 
longer journeys.
Poorer access to cash can lead to lower use of 
cash, thus drawing more attention to the high 
fixed costs8 for its supply. In order to reduce overall fixed costs, cash infrastructure could be 
downsized, which would kick off a downward 
spiral. The consequence of this spiral would be 
the serious limitation of the choice of means of 
payment in everyday life. Given the reduction 
of the cash infrastructure that has already taken 
place and the transmission channel described 
above, it is therefore no longer a given that 
people in Germany will continue to be able to 
use cash to the current extent in the future.
Representative population surveys conducted 
by the Bundesbank, on the other hand, show 
that people appreciate cash and wish to remain 
free to choose how they pay in the future.9 At 
the same time, the dismantling of the cash in -
frastructure increases dependence on commer -
cial providers of cashless payment systems and 
on the technical infrastructure necessary for 
such payments. These constraints and depend -
encies would result in lower resilience through -
out the payment landscape, especially in times 
of crisis.
The Bundesbank has a statutory mandate to 
supply cash in Germany.10 In carrying out this 
mandate, the Bundesbank restricts itself to 
supplying credit institutions with cash, which in 
turn provide cash to their customers (con -
sumers and retailers). The Eurosystem’s cash 
strategy is aimed at keeping euro banknotes 
and coins available and generally accepted as a 
means of payment and store of value in the Cash use at high 
level, albeit 
declining
Analyses show 
dense network 
of cash access 
points, but also 
initial signs of 
deteriorationWithout active 
countermeas -
ures, downward 
spiral could 
impact free 
choice of pay -
ment method
Downsizing cash 
infrastructure 
would reduce 
resilience of 
entire payment 
landscape
The Bundesbank 
is committed to 
upholding cash 
as a generally 
accepted and 
accessible 
means of 
payment 
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a) and European Central 
Bank (2022).
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a), p. 26.
3 Strongholds of cash use are those social and economic 
situations in which the primary payment method is cash. 
These include, for example, tips, gifts, fairs, flea markets 
and payment machines.
4 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a, 2023a).
5 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022b).
6 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b).
7 See, for example, Atzler and Stippler (2023), Heinhaus 
(2023), Kopp (2023), and Tagesschau (2021).
8 Fixed costs include the costs of maintaining the cash sup -
ply and disposal infrastructure. Examples include costs for 
ATMs or cash registers.
9 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a). 69% of respondents 
said that the opportunity to use cash was very or rather 
important.
10 See Section 3 (Tasks) Bundesbank Act (BBankG).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
32

future.11 It is therefore necessary to analyse 
and, if necessary, adjust the underlying condi -
tions that affect cash’s future status as a gener -
ally accepted and accessible means of pay -
ment.
Analyses of payment behaviour, access to cash 
or the cost structure in the cash cycle provide 
important insights on this topic. Cash is em -
bedded in a complex social and economic 
structure. The demands of the general public 
run up against the interests of cash handlers 
and providers of cashless means of payment. 
These demands and interests are shaped by 
constant social and economic changes, such as 
advancing digitalisation. Any outlook for the 
future of cash must therefore take these fac -
tors and relationships into account as far as 
possible.
The Bundesbank therefore commissioned a 
study on the topic of “the cash of the future”. 
VDI/ VDE Innovation + Technik took lead re -
sponsibility for creating the study between Feb -
ruary 2022 and November 2023.12 Three scen -
arios for the future of cash were developed for 
the study using strategic foresight (SF) method -
ologies. These methodologies take a systematic 
look at the opportunities and challenges of the 
medium to long- term future. This study drew 
upon empirical data and the expertise of nu -
merous cash cycle experts and experts from 
other institutions. The opinion of the general 
public was incorporated by means of a repre -
sentative survey and focus groups.
The scenarios describe potential alternative de -
velopments for cash and its environment in 
Germany up to 2037. The scenarios are hypo -
thetical, plausible and logical images of the fu -
ture. They are not forecasts for futures actually 
expected to materialise, nor were they selected 
based on whether they are desirable. What 
they provide instead is answers to questions 
about what existing and future trends are likely 
to shape cash, what future requirements the 
public and players in the cash cycle might have 
for cash in the future, and what role cash could play in the future payment landscape. The 
scenarios allow the formation of a common 
understanding of the most prominent factors 
influencing the cash of the future. These in -
sights allow the Bundesbank to draw conclu -
sions concerning its mandate to supply cash.
This article outlines the process of creating the 
scenarios. The scenarios themselves are then 
briefly presented and their main similarities and 
differences analysed. The article ends by classi -
fying the scenarios and presenting the Bundes -
bank’s conclusions.
Scenario creation
The scenario method is an established and 
widely used SF procedure with a wide range of 
approaches.13 The study described here uses a 
key- factor- based scenario approach with a var -
iety of established methods for collecting quan -
titative and qualitative data. This allows the an -
alysis of factors influencing the field of cash 
and the cash cycle of the future. The most rele -
vant factors are called key factors. Taken in isol -
ation, key factors can promote or curb cash 
use. The SF and the methods used in the study 
are presented in detail in the box near the end 
of this article, entitled “Methodology of the 
‘Cash of the future’ study” (see pp. 42 ff.).
Amongst other things, SF is based on collective 
knowledge and integrates diverse perspectives 
and expertise. The inclusion of the specialist 
knowledge of the Bundesbank’s experts and 
those involved in the cash cycle as well as the 
public as the users of cash was fundamental to 
the study.14 When selecting the methods, it 
was therefore vital that robust empirical data Looking at the 
cash of the 
future requires 
understanding 
of complex rela -
tionships and 
interactions
Three scenarios 
for the future of 
cash, developed 
using strategic 
foresight 
methodsScenarios are 
developed using 
established stra -
tegic foresight 
methodologies
Expertise of cash 
cycle players 
and general 
public inte -
grated into 
study
11 See European Central Bank (2022), and https://www.
ecb.europa.eu/euro/cash_strategy/html/index.de.html
12 The study was carried out by VDI/ VDE Innovation + 
Technik on behalf of the Bundesbank under the “Cash of 
the future” contract for the Bundesbank. SINUS Markt- und 
Sozialforschung GmbH were subcontractors. The Bundes -
bank published the study on 17  January 2024; see 
Ehrenberg-  Silies et al. (2024).
13 See Weimert and Römer (2021).
14 See Störmer et al. (2020).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
33

were generated while simultaneously integrat -
ing the aforementioned expertise and perspec -
tives. In the case of the public, this was done 
through focus groups and a representative sur -
vey. The framework conditions for this survey 
and the main results are described in the ex -
planatory notes on “Public perspectives on the 
future of cash” on pp. 35ff.
The scenarios thus developed in this study are 
intended to open up new perspectives on pos -
sible and plausible futures of cash. In this way, 
the scenarios support decision- making and 
strategy- building as well as communication 
with different dialogue partners.15 The scen -
arios are summarised below.16
Possible futures for cash
Each scenario describes the payment landscape 
and the circumstances surrounding it in 2037, 
as well as the trajectories of the key factors 
that led to the future in question.
The hyperdigital payment 
world
The scenario “The hyperdigital payment world 
– artificially intelligent, convenient and vulner -
able” (“hyperdigital payment world”) describes 
a highly digitalised world. In this scenario, cash 
has all but disappeared from everyday payment 
situations and payments between individuals, 
as it cannot be integrated into digital systems 
and processes. Cash now only accounts for 
15% of transactions overall. It does still get 
used as a store of value, alongside other 
methods. For various different reasons, some 
groups within society have difficulties with – or 
concerns about – the high degree of digitalisa -
tion. People belonging to milieus that tend to -
wards more traditional values, those within a 
high age bracket (80 years and older) and 
people with a low level of formal education, 
especially, take an ambivalent view. On the one 
hand, for example, cashless means of payment are perceived as complicated to use; on the 
other hand, the new payment reality brings im -
provements to people’s lives, such as facilitat -
ing the operation of unstaffed micro- markets 
where people in rural areas can do their shop -
ping.
Cash payments are now costly for cash hand -
lers. Consequently, the option to pay with cash 
is only offered if the composition of the local 
population necessitates it, particularly in the 
case of public institutions. In this scenario, even 
settings that used to be strongholds of cash are 
now largely cash- free. In this highly digitalised 
environment, convenience and comfort are the 
core motives driving decisions on how to pay 
for almost all social groups. Data protection 
and the shielding of privacy are also cited as 
motives, though are all but ignored in day- to- 
day life.
Digitalisation has increased the vulnerability of 
cashless payments, but that makes no differ -
ence to the trust that the public places in these 
payment solutions and the systems that power 
them. There are also a plethora of alternative 
cashless payment solutions. Data leaks are ac -
cepted as the price to be paid for digitalisation. 
The public continues to keep a stock of cash at 
home for extreme emergencies.
Cash access points are primarily operated by 
banks and savings banks, though with a hugely 
thinned- out ATM network. Cashback and 
cash- in- shop17 services have been rendered 
practically impossible by the disappearance of 
staffed checkouts and reduced options for pay -
ing in cash. The low prevalence of cash trans -
lates into high cost pressures for cash cycle Three scenarios 
describe the 
payment land -
scape and its 
setting in 2037
In the “hyper -
digital payment 
world” scenario, 
cash has all but 
disappeared 
from everyday 
life …… and entails 
high costs for 
cash handlers
In this scenario, 
access to cash 
is severely 
restricted
15 See Kosow and Gaßner (2008), p. 15.
16 Full descriptions of the scenarios can be found in the 
“Cash of the future” study. See Ehrenberg-  Silies et al. 
(2024).
17 Cashback and cash- in- shop are ways of carrying out 
cash transactions at the point of sale. In the case of cash -
back, the customer can withdraw cash when paying for 
their purchase. With cash- in- shop, you can make with -
drawals and deposits without first needing to have made a 
purchase, but it is subject to tighter regulatory require -
ments in return.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
34

Public perspectives on the future of cash
As cash users, the general public plays a key 
role in the cash cycle. In view of this, the 
“Cash of the future” study1 examines the 
future requirements that citizens will have 
for cash. Cash use depends not only on re-
tailers’ acceptance of and public access to 
cash, but also on consumer attitudes to-
wards cash versus cashless payment 
methods. The Bundesbank’s survey on pay-
ment behaviour in Germany has already es-
tablished that frequency of cash use varies 
based on age and income level. At the 
same time, however, these attitudes cannot 
be explained solely by the socioeconomic or 
demographic characteristics of the respond-
ents, such as age or level of education. 
They are also infl  uenced by the different so-
cietal groups to which the respondents be-
long: groups which are defi  ned by socio- 
cultural characteristics such as values. This 
raises the question of what value orienta-
tions and lifestyles are associated with the 
use of cash. It seemed fi  tting, then, to use 
the SINUS milieus model for a lifestyle an-
alysis based on qualitative focus group dis-
cussions and a quantitative public survey. 
The results of this lifestyle analysis were 
used both for the identifi  cation of infl  uen-
cing factors and for the development of the 
projections.
The SINUS milieus are a model of society 
used in market and social research that 
combines persons with similar values and 
comparable social status into groups of like- 
minded people. These groups thus produce 
a differentiated description of the personal 
worlds people inhabit.2 Using this tried and 
tested model allows the study to derive a 
comprehensive picture of the general pub-
lic’s payment method preferences and the 
requirements they have for cash. The chart 
on p.  36 is a graphical depiction of the SINUS milieus in a matrix of social status 
and basic values – these basic values repre-
sent fundamental attitudes towards change, 
roughly speaking. The higher up a milieu is 
placed, the higher the level of education 
and income as well as social status, seen 
from a social sciences perspective. The fur-
ther to the right it extends, the more mod-
ern the basic values of the people within it, 
in socio- cultural terms. A total of ten differ-
ent milieus are currently recognised.
The combination of a qualitative and a 
quantitative research approach made it 
possible to identify the motives behind the 
use of cash, as well as to quantify how 
prevalent these were. For the qualitative 
focus groups, the ten SINUS milieus were 
grouped into fi  ve segments according to 
expected similarities in their use of and atti-
tudes toward cash. Based on a semi- 
structured interview guide, group discus-
sions with between six and eight partici-
pants apiece were conducted for each seg-
ment. For the public survey, 1,600 online 
respondents and 400 telephone partici-
pants provided information on their use of 
and attitudes toward cash as well as their 
expectations for future cash use. In add-
ition, the respondents answered the stand-
ardised questions enabling them to be as-
signed to one of the SINUS milieus. The 
qualitative part of the analysis focused on 
the debate surrounding cash, understand-
ing of motives for using cash and corres-
ponding attitudes towards the subject of 
the study. A quantitative analysis of the sur-
vey results revealed the extent of and differ-
ences in the distribution of the correspond-
1 See Ehrenberg- Silies et al. (2024).
2 Information on the SINUS milieus can be found at 
https://www.sinus-institut.de/en/sinus-milieusDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
35

ing attitudes across the individual milieus. 
The quantitative results are shown in the 
following.
For seven out of ten respondents, it is im-
portant that both they and society as a 
whole are still able to pay in cash in future. 
The personal importance of cash is above 
average in those milieus with more trad-
itional basic values and lower social status 
(see the dark blue- shaded milieus in the 
chart). This makes it clear that the usual 
characterisation of cash users by sociode-
mographic characteristics alone does not 
fully refl  ect the different realities of the re-
spondents’ lives. By contrast, the personal 
importance of cash is much less signifi  cant 
in milieus which are characterised by mod-
ern basic values and have a higher social 
status (see the light blue- shaded milieus in 
the chart). However, the perceived rele-
vance of cash as a means of payment in so-
ciety as a whole is similarly high in almost all milieus, irrespective of social status and 
value orientation.
Although the personal importance of cash 
differs depending on an individual’s social 
status and basic values, cash is still fi  rmly 
entrenched in all societal groups. Only 
around 17% of all respondents state that 
they would welcome a world without cash. 
This percentage is particularly low among 
those respondents assigned to the trad-
itional segments. In the segments with 
more modern basic values, on the other 
hand, slightly more than the average of all 
respondents said they would welcome a 
world without cash. Similarly, an average of 
around 67% across all respondents express 
concern about the abolition of cash. An 
above- average number of respondents be-
longing to the traditional milieus share 
these concerns, while those belonging to 
milieus with more modern attitudes worry SINUS milieu® model and perceived importance of having the option  
to pay with cash*
Source: SINUS-Institut.
* Share of “Very important” and “Somewhat important” responses. Basis: n = 2,000 (all respondents). Question: “Generally  
speaking, how important is it to you to have the option of paying with cash?”
Deutsche BundesbankSocial status 

Upper class/
Upper middle class
Middle class 
Lower middle class/
Lower class
Basic values  Modernisation Tradition Re-orientationConservative  
Upscale Milieu
82%
Precarious Milieu
86%Post-Materialist 
Milieu
65%Performer 
Milieu
59 %Expeditive  
Milieu
62%
Traditional  
Milieu
91%Nostalgic  
Middle Class  
Milieu
81%Adaptive-Pragmatic 
Middle Class Milieu 
70%
Consumer- 
Hedonistic  
Milieu
74%Neo- 
Ecological  
Milieu
68 %
 Strongly above average  Average  Strongly below average∅ = 73%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
36

participants  . Only a small number of effective 
cost- cutting measures are implemented. Innov -
ations in the area of digitalisation were intro -
duced too late to have a stabilising effect.
The Federal Government adopts statutory 
standards to secure a basic level of cash provi -
sion for retailers and the general public. In a 
digitalised society susceptible to outages, the 
idea is to preserve the cash infrastructure in 
case of crisis. Cash retains its unique character -
istic of being largely independent of technical 
infrastructure. The digital euro, which is already 
in use in the reference year 2037, has little im -
pact on the use of cash, as the latter has al -
ready declined steeply anyway.
The cash renaissance payment 
world
The scenario “A cash renaissance payment 
world – smart, self- determined and resilient” (“cash renaissance”) describes a partial return 
to cash and its advantages. Developments in 
the 2020s – extreme weather events, a pan -
demic and wars – illustrated the vulnerability of 
infrastructure and an economy that depends 
on globalised and barely diversified supply 
chains functioning smoothly. Awareness of 
these developments led to an appetite for a 
more sustainable way of life, associated with 
purchasing regional products and services and 
doing one’s shopping locally. Since cash was 
typically accepted in such local shops, the de -
cline in cash use abated somewhat. Cash and 
the digital euro are perceived as instruments 
for European autonomy. As in the previous 
scenario, all areas of life are becoming increas -
ingly digitalised; however, advances in the field 
of artificial intelligence (AI) soon make many 
people wonder whether this is actually a desir -
able state of affairs.
Even groups comfortable with digital technolo -
gies are deliberately turning more and more to In this scenario, 
legal standards 
are supposed to 
preserve the 
already greatly 
diminished cash 
infrastructure in 
case of crisisPartial return to 
the advantages 
of cash in the 
“cash renais -
sance” scenarioabout cash being abolished slightly less 
often.
Regardless of whether or not respondents 
welcome a world without cash, around 
70% anticipate a general decline in cash 
usage. By contrast, only around 28% of re-
spondents on average expect their personal 
use of cash to decrease in future. In particu-
lar, those respondents assigned to the mod-
ern milieus expect cash usage to decline, 
both generally speaking and in individual 
terms. Respondents allocated to the more 
traditional milieus, on the contrary, antici-
pate only a small decline in their own use of 
cash. Provided that these expectations re-
garding personal cash use are fulfi  lled, it 
will be possible to further differentiate be-
tween societal groups: those who currently 
predominantly use cash to pay may also re-
tain this behaviour in future. On the other 
hand, there is a growing number of people who are almost exclusively using cashless 
means of payment. Furthermore, the use of 
cash might be less strongly tied to age than 
it was before, while the importance of value 
orientation and social status would in-
crease.
Differing requirements for the characteris-
tics of payment instruments are probably 
one reason for this. The parts of society 
who want to continue paying in cash value 
it as a means of budget control, amongst 
other things. For milieus in which cash 
usage is decreasing, on the other hand, 
convenience is the main factor in choice of 
payment method. In these milieus, conveni-
ence is attributed more frequently to digital 
payment solutions, whilst in the other mi-
lieus, cash, too, is described as being con-
venient.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
37

cash – and its complement, the digital euro – 
as a mode of payment, motivated by data mini -
misation and digital sovereignty. Cash is associ -
ated with sovereignty, independence and “con -
structive rebellion”. It serves as a lifestyle prod -
uct and a way of setting yourself apart from 
the mainstream. Younger people and those on 
small budgets are also increasingly using cash 
again, or are carrying on using it. These devel -
opments radiate well into society’s centre 
ground. Innovations make cash simpler and 
faster. For example, 1 and 2 cent coins are 
abolished, rounding rules are introduced and 
payment machines with a cash function are in -
creasingly present. Depending on the payment 
situation, cash and the digital euro – with its 
low data load  – are the payment media of 
choice. Overall, the share of cash continues to 
shrink, but the decline is relatively slow.
Access to cash does not get worse than it was 
in the 2020s. The network of ATMs and bank 
branches shrinks only slowly, and access via 
cash services offered by retailers is expanded. 
Owing to the public’s experiences during cri -
ses, people are holding larger amounts of cash 
as a store of value. There is a high level of 
awareness that cash can only function as a 
backup solution in the event of a crisis if there 
is a strong infrastructure in place when times 
are normal. The Federal Government thus 
strengthens cash through regulatory means 
and recommends that retailers accept cash as a 
matter of principle. Binding standards are set 
for access to and acceptance of cash. The im -
portance of euro cash as legal tender is thus 
underscored through policy.
The regulations mean that it makes sense for 
cash cycle stakeholders to invest. Commercial 
banks were quick to take account of the poten -
tial impact of the new regulations on access to 
cash. They feared that if infrastructure were to 
be scaled back further, they would find them -
selves forced to rebuild capacity, and that 
would be a costly undertaking. Digitalisation 
and AI applications are deployed in the cash 
cycle, enabling costs to be brought down and helping to keep profits up. For retailers, accept -
ing cash becomes more attractive again, as ef -
ficiency gains and regulatory support bolstering 
cash use have meant that the costs of cash 
supply and removal have come back down 
after having increased for a time.
The vanishing hybrid payment 
world
The scenario “The vanishing hybrid payment 
world – pluralistic, segregated and indifferent” 
(“hybrid payment world”) describes a world 
characterised by a shift towards greater indi -
viduality of living standards, lifestyles and per -
sonal environments, increasing complexity and 
progressive digitalisation. The payment land -
scape is hybrid: different means of payment 
exist in parallel and are each used by different 
parts of the population. At the same time, this 
hybridity is under threat.
Payment behaviour is highly differentiated and 
depends on what social groups and milieus in -
dividuals belong to. People who are open to 
innovations in payment transactions use cash -
less means of payment and the digital euro 
more than cash. Economically restricted or dis -
advantaged individuals and people looking for 
simplicity and a good overview of their own 
expenditure favour cash over the cashless 
methods. People who do not trust the govern -
ment or private digital providers and therefore 
wish to use means of payment that do not in -
volve a lot of data also prefer cash. Irrespective 
of their individual payment behaviour, all social 
milieus want to be free to choose how they 
pay. Nevertheless, cash use is in steady decline 
in this scenario, falling to 31% of total transac -
tions.
In some erstwhile strongholds cash remains 
relevant but, even there, its use is declining. 
The only way that it continues to be used 
across almost all milieus is as a store of value, 
albeit to different extents. The decline is grad -
ual and happens without society and policy -Cash is appreci -
ated and used 
in this scenario 
for data mini -
misation reasons
Access to cash 
in this scenario 
remains good, 
and acceptance 
is supported by 
a recommenda -
tion that cash 
should be 
accepted
Digitalisation 
and innovations 
in the cash cycle 
enable costs to 
be cutThe “hybrid pay -
ment world” 
scenario sees 
various types of 
payment instru -
ments coexisting
In this scenario, 
the share of 
cash is steadily 
declining, 
although there 
is a high desire 
for freedom of 
choice when it 
comes to pay -
ment media
Restrictions in 
terms of access 
to and accept -
ance of cash 
lead to a decline 
in cash pay -
ments in this 
scenarioDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
38

makers taking much notice. Retailers adjust 
what means of payment they accept to suit the 
customer base in question and, at the same 
time, encourage all customers to opt for cash -
less methods. Cashback and cash-  in- shop ser -
vices are therefore now viable to only a limited 
extent. Authorities also prefer cashless pay -
ments. Both sides justify this behaviour by cit -
ing the high costs associated with cash.
The fixed costs associated with cash have not 
fallen much at all. Innovations exert only a 
small amount of leverage on the cost structure. 
It is growing harder and harder for the public in 
particular to access cash due to the intense 
thinning of the ATM and bank branch network. 
These developments in terms of access and 
accept ance lead to a gradual decline for cash 
that is met with hardly any resistance. In this 
cocktail of circumstances, policymakers do 
nothing to stabilise the cash infrastructure. This 
means that the hybrid payment world, and 
with it the freedom of choice when it comes to 
payment methods, are increasingly losing 
ground.
Analysis of the scenarios
Use of cash
Cash has not disappeared completely in any of 
the scenarios. Although the scenarios describe 
different payment landscapes, cash is used for 
different reasons in all scenarios. Based on the 
data collected, a world without cash does not 
appear plausible within the next 15 to 20 years. 
However, in all three scenarios, access to cash 
deteriorates and cash acceptance and use de -
cline, with the pace and intensity of these pro -
cesses varying.
The pronounced digitalisation of all areas of 
life, and the pervasion of cashless means of 
payment that this favours, lead to a sharp de -
cline in the proportion of cash payments in two 
scenarios. In the “hyperdigital payment world” 
scenario, cash accounts for only 15% of total transactions. In 2021, just under 58% of all 
payment transactions were still settled in 
cash.18 The main drivers of this development 
are the continued strong growth in online 
commerce and the growing prevalence of low- 
staff or staff- free markets equipped with self-  
service checkout systems, which rarely offer 
options for paying in cash. Although outages 
of the technical infrastructure and cyberattacks 
on cashless payment systems are a feature of 
life in this scenario, the risks can be mitigated 
by the existence of a plethora of alternative 
cashless solutions. The government and firms 
are also primed and prepared for these kinds of 
disruption. As in all scenarios, cash is kept at 
home as an emergency reserve, since it is still 
valued for its general independence from tech -
nical infrastructure. Even the digital euro can -
not dilute this unique characteristic in the scen -
arios. Cash usage also declines sharply in the 
“hybrid payment world” scenario. Cash pay -
ments are expected to account for around 31% 
of all transactions. Similarly to the first scenario, 
outages due to technical faults or cyberattacks 
exert at most a temporary impact on usage be -
haviour.
For various reasons, including enhanced con -
sumer awareness of data protection issues as 
well as the desire for a return to a more ana -
logue life and greater simplicity, cash use ex -
periences a much smaller decline in the “cash 
renaissance” scenario. The proportion of cash -
less payment instruments therefore grows 
much more slowly than at the beginning of the 
2020s. In addition, this scenario assumes that, 
owing to a growing awareness of crisis situ -
ations and disasters, the use of cash as a store 
of value and a stockpile in the event of an 
emergency takes on a much greater role than 
in the other two scenarios.Cash’s gradual 
decline meets 
with barely any 
resistance
Cash is still used 
in all scenarios
In two of the 
three scenarios, 
the share of 
cash payments 
declines 
sharply, …
18 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
39

Acceptance of and access to 
cash
Cash use in each of the scenarios is heavily in -
fluenced by how widely cash is accepted as a 
means of payment and how easy it is to access. 
There are marked differences between the 
scenarios. In the “hyperdigital payment world” 
scenario, acceptance of cash in retail settings, 
public institutions and former strongholds of 
cash usage is barely upheld anymore. In this 
scenario, digitalisation has led to the wide -
spread prevalence of cashless payment solu -
tions, which are often directly integrated into 
the process of requesting services digitally or 
placing an order. Legal requirements for cash 
acceptance are barely effective in this scenario, 
as there are so many exceptions to the rules. It 
is a similar story for cash acceptance in the “hy -
brid payment world” scenario. While retailers 
especially are guided by the wishes of their cus -
tomers when it comes to whether they accept 
cash or not, customers are also being encour -
aged to pay using contactless options. In some 
former cash strongholds, cash still has a foot -
ing, but is of declining importance. In this scen -
ario, there is a fundamental obligation to ac -
cept cash, but there are a host of exceptions 
that can be invoked. Acceptance of cash is at 
its highest in the “cash renaissance” scenario: it 
is assumed that the Federal Government is 
moved by an EU regulation in the early 2030s 
to issue a recommendation that cash should be 
accepted and introduces binding standards for 
acceptance. Public authorities are only allowed 
to refuse to accept cash on efficiency grounds 
in exceptional cases.
In all three scenarios, access to cash continues 
to take place via banks and saving banks’ 
branch and ATM network, albeit with severe 
restrictions in some cases. In the “hyperdigital 
payment world” and “hybrid payment world” 
scenarios, this network is heavily pared back 
compared with the present day and with the 
“cash renaissance” scenario. This development 
is a result of the decline in consumer demand 
for cash. In addition, the downsizing of the ATM network in these scenarios is accelerated 
due to the frequent attacks on ATMs with ex -
plosives in the 2020s. As the use of cash in re -
tail trade declines in both scenarios and retail -
ers scarcely accept cash payments any more, 
cashback and cash- in- shop services can no 
longer be used to withdraw cash at the point 
of sale, or can only be used to a very limited 
extent. In the “hyperdigital payment world” 
scenario, in response to the significant restric -
tions on access to cash, statutory minimum 
standards for the basic supply of cash to the 
public are adopted on the basis of the EU regu -
lation on euro banknotes and coins that this 
scenario assumes to have been introduced. By 
contrast, in the “hybrid payment world” scen -
ario, no momentum is created that might lead 
policymakers to improve access to and accept -
ance of cash. In the “cash renaissance” scen -
ario, the pace of the decline in banks and sav -
ings banks’ branch and ATM network slows 
down, while retail cash services expand at the 
same time. Access to cash in this scenario is 
therefore significantly better. One reason for 
this development is that, in anticipation of legal 
provisions, commercial banks would rather 
maintain the infrastructure, as opposed to re -
building it, which could potentially be more 
cost- intensive.
Freedom of choice, resilience 
and political pressure to act
Although the freedom to choose between pay -
ment instruments is technically assured in all 
scenarios, it is no longer guaranteed in practice 
in two scenarios. In the “hyperdigital payment 
world” scenario, freedom of choice does not 
exist in practice on account of extensive digi -
talisation and consumer behaviour. Every con -
sumer can theoretically use cash in the “hybrid 
payment world” scenario. In practice, however, 
very limited access to cash means that there is 
hardly any freedom of choice. In both scen -
arios, regulatory measures do not go far 
enough to ensure real freedom of choice in ac -
tual fact. However, in the “cash renaissance” … and accept -
ance and access 
are key factors 
influencing cash 
use
Access to cash 
and associated 
measures vary 
across scenariosFreedom of 
choice is no 
longer guaran -
teed in two of 
the three scen -
ariosDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
40

scenario, freedom of choice continues to be 
guaranteed in practice, albeit with restrictions. 
This is due to regulatory intervention by the 
government in the form of a recommendation 
on the acceptance of cash and standards for 
access to cash.
All three scenarios describe cash as the only 
contingency solution in the event of technical 
disruptions and as an element that provides 
confidence in times of crisis. Even the digital 
euro is only regarded as a short- term contin -
gency solution in the event that offline use is 
possible. Sensitivity to the risks of outages af -
fecting cashless payment instruments, cyber -
crime and crises is evaluated differently in the 
scenarios. In the “hyperdigital payment world” 
and “hybrid payment world” scenarios, sensi -
tivity is described as being low. In the “hyper -
digital payment world” scenario, outages are 
countered by solutions of a technical nature: 
alternative payment instruments are used and 
government and economic entities’ cyber de -
fence is perceived to be strong. The general 
public has set aside cash reserves for wide -
spread and broad- based power outages. Just 
like in the “hybrid payment world” scenario, 
experiences of outages and crises in the “hy -
perdigital payment world” scenario have no 
impact on the behaviour of the general public.
In the “cash renaissance” scenario, political 
pressure to act is described as being high. This 
is due to greater sensitivity to crises and disas -
ters both in government and among the gen -
eral public, coupled with the awareness of the 
importance of cash for civil society. Policy -
makers are aware of the implications for cash 
use arising from restrictions on acceptance and 
access. Corresponding regulatory intervention 
is therefore considered likely. This is not the 
case in the other two scenarios. Hardly any pol -
itical pressure to act exists; minimum standards 
for supplying the general public are established 
(“hyperdigital payment world” scenario) or 
monitoring is carried out without any specific 
recommendations for action (“hybrid payment 
world” scenario). As a consequence, cash use cannot be stabilised in either of these scen -
arios, while the regulatory intervention in the 
“cash renaissance” scenario slows down the 
decline in the use of cash.
Cash cycle
Regulatory measures also have implications for 
the cash cycle. The decline in the use of cash in 
all scenarios heightens pressure to reduce the 
fixed costs required to maintain the infrastruc -
ture for supplying and removing cash. The 
scenarios describe different developments with 
regard to the introduction of adjustments and 
innovations to the cash cycle that could lower 
costs. In the “cash renaissance” scenario, it is 
assumed that stakeholders in the cash cycle 
consider innovations and adjustments to be 
sensible on account of the regulatory meas -
ures. Consequently, effective cost-  cutting 
measures are implemented in the cash cycle. 
Furthermore, this scenario assumes that digi -
talisation and AI applications can be used pro -
ductively in the cash cycle. As a result, the fixed 
costs of cash decrease and the access to and 
acceptance of cash stabilises, meaning that 
cash use declines to a lesser degree. In the 
other two scenarios, a generally lower level of 
political support makes the benefits of innov -
ations in the cash cycle that are relatively cost- 
intensive seem small. Stakeholders in the cash 
cycle therefore implement only very few effect -
ive measures and at too late a stage to have a 
stabilising effect. This results in the fixed costs 
of cash hardly decreasing. Instead, the infra -
structure is scaled back.
Need for action
Cash is of great importance for society as a 
whole. This is shown both by regular surveys 
conducted by the Bundesbank19 and by prelim -
inary results of the study presented here.20 The Cash is needed 
as a contin -
gency solution 
in all three scen -
arios, but …
… stabilising 
regulatory 
measures are 
only used as a 
response in the 
“cash renais -
sance” scenarioIn the scenarios, 
innovations to 
reduce the fixed 
costs of cash in 
the cash cycle 
depend on polit -
ical support for 
cash
Scenarios show 
a future with 
cash, but also 
mounting pres -
sure on cash
19 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a).
20 See the box entitled “Public perspectives on the future 
of cash” on pp. 35ff.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
41

Methodology of the “Cash of the future” study
Strategic foresight
“Strategic foresight” methods help enter-
prises, institutions and organisations to 
identify developments on which they are 
able to exert an infl  uence and also play an 
active role in shaping them by taking appro-
priate measures. At the same time, strategic 
foresight supports its users in preparing 
themselves for developments that they are 
unable to infl  uence as well as in remaining 
operational during times of crisis. Overall, 
these methods aim to lay the foundations 
for forward- looking decisions and strategies 
in a complex and uncertain world.1 In this 
context, strategic foresight is widespread 
not only among governments and inter-
national organisations, but also in corpor-
ate and academic contexts.2
An approach commonly used in strategic 
foresight is the scenario approach,3 which 
develops multiple exploratory and hypo-
thetical visions of the future –  or “scen-
arios” – for a predefi  ned subject area. These 
scenarios not only describe alternate fu-
tures, but also outline the pathways that 
might lead to them. The “Cash of the fu-
ture” study constructs exploratory scenarios 
that include possible and plausible, but not 
necessarily desirable, developments.4
The scenarios primarily serve the purposes 
of decision- making and strategy- building. 
To this end, they must be developed in an 
unbiased and open- minded way. They also 
draw attention to the potential develop-
ment trajectories and interdependencies of 
infl  uencing factors as well as reveal any 
boundaries of knowledge. In this way, the 
scenarios open up different perspectives 
and make potential futures more conceiv-
able and more tangible.Scenario construction process
The selected approach towards scenario 
construction is divided into multiple steps. 
First, the scenario fi  eld was defi  ned. The 
scenario fi  eld describes the topic of investi-
gation, the future of which is to be depicted 
by the scenarios.5 In the study presented 
here, the topic of investigation comprised 
euro cash, the use of cash and the cash 
cycle in Germany in 15 to 20 years’ time. 
These aspects were to be placed in a social, 
political, technical, economic, environmen-
tal and legal context. Cash was defi  ned as a 
physical means of payment that is transfer-
able from person to person and that is is-
sued by the central bank. Although the 
scenario fi  eld focused on cash in Germany, 
developments in cashless means of pay-
ment as well as international aspects also 
had to be taken into consideration owing 
to the position of cash in the domestic and 
international payments landscape. These 
1 See Störmer et al. (2020) and Fraunhofer Institute for 
Systems and Innovation Research ISI (2022), p.  4. 
Here, a study on the institutionalisation of strategic 
foresight commissioned by the German Federal Gov-
ernment states that strategic foresight paves the way 
for “prudent, innovative and transformative policy that 
allows simmering issues and crises to be identifi  ed at 
an early stage and tackled proactively, and compe-
tently addresses complex cross- sectional challenges”.
2 Examples of the use of strategic foresight using 
various  methodological approaches include the Shell 
Scenarios (https://www.shell.com/energy-and- 
innovation/the-energy-future/scenarios.html), the 
studies conducted by Zukunftsbüro for VORAUS:schau! 
commissioned by the German Federal Ministry of Edu-
cation and Research (https://www.vorausschau.de/
vorausschau/de/home/home_node.html), and the 
studies conducted by the Competence Centre on Fore-
sight at the European Commission’s Joint Research 
Centre (https://knowledge4policy.ec.europa.eu/
foresight_en).
3 See Weimert and Römer (2021).
4 See Kosow and Gaßner (2008), p. 24. “Exploratory” 
scenarios illustrate possible future developments, start-
ing from the present situation, primarily answering the 
question “what if?”. “Desirable” scenarios, by contrast, 
provide information on how something should be and 
how this might be achieved.
5 See Kosow and Gaßner (2008).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
42

are not at the centre of the investigation, 
however.
Using a number of established methods 
from the fi  eld of futures studies, the factors 
that could potentially have an impact on 
the scenario fi  eld were then identifi  ed. From 
these infl  uencing factors, key factors were 
selected and analysed. The key factors are 
the infl  uencing factors that have the largest 
impact on how cash develops going for-
ward and, at the same time, are subject to 
the greatest degree of uncertainty in this re-
gard.
In order to analyse the key factors, hypoth-
eses on their possible future development 
were then derived. These hypotheses were 
based on data from the results of the previ-
ous steps of the process. Alongside these 
data- driven results, the authors’ empirical 
knowledge and subjective assumptions 
were also drawn upon when further elabor-
ating the potential future developments. 
This concerned, for example, the stability of 
or changes in trends. The hypotheses were 
checked for plausibility and evaluated with 
regard to their relevance and probability of 
occurrence using a systematic, two- stage 
survey (Delphi method) of experts from vari-
ous specialist backgrounds.In order to construct the scenarios, three 
development trajectories (projections) were 
elaborated for each key factor on the basis 
of the hypotheses. They follow the MECE 
principle (mutually exclusive and collectively 
exhaustive). The projections are based on 
the possible developments that the experts 
assumed to be likely. To construct each 
scenario, one projection was selected for 
each key factor and the various projections 
were combined to form an internally con-
sistent scenario.6 For three scenarios, three 
clearly distinct projections are usually pro-
duced for each key factor.
The chart above shows how the individual 
methods used were allocated to each of 
the steps described here, according to their 
thematic focus.
Some of the foresight methods were used 
in more than one of these steps. Horizon 
scanning, for example, also provided in-
sights for the development of future as-
6 This was carried out using a morphological box fol-
lowing Franz Zwicky. This allowed the combinations of 
projections to be analysed with regard to the consist-
ency of their content as well as any frictions. See 
Kosow  and Gaßner (2008), p. 49.Key-factor-based scenario approach of the study and the foresight methods used
Source: Ehrenberg-Silies et al. (2024).
Deutsche BundesbankIdentification of
influencing factors
Horizon
scanning
STEEP + VLDetermination of
key factors
Cross-impact 
analysisDevelopment of 
future assumptions
Megatrend  
analysis
Lifestyle  
analysis
Cash cycle stake -
holder analysis
DelphiConstruction of
scenarios
Scenario  
building blocks
Further
elaborationDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
43

sumptions, while the megatrend, lifestyle,7 
and cash cycle stakeholder analyses yielded 
additional infl  uencing factors. For this rea-
son, the study deviated from the sequence 
of steps shown here and these methods 
were employed before the cross- impact an-
alysis. In the following, the methods are de-
scribed in chronological order.
Horizon scanning
After the scenario fi  eld was identifi  ed, one 
of the methods used to identify infl  uencing 
factors was horizon scanning. Horizon 
scanning enables online sources to be sys-
tematically searched for information in the 
context of the topic of investigation within 
predefi  ned search fi  elds. This allows poten-
tially relevant trends, developments and 
technologies as well as weak signals to be 
discovered. Weak signals are early informa-
tion about possible impending changes that 
are not immediately obvious. Examples of 
weak signals include newly disseminated 
opinions and ideas or changes in the legal 
framework.8 Using this method, initial infor-
mation, data and analytical relationships for 
possible factors infl  uencing the future of 
cash were collected. The search fi  elds de-
fi  ned within the framework of the study in-
cluded, for example, characteristics of cash 
such as inclusion, avoidance of negative 
interest rates, and logistics and services re-
lated to cash. The search strategy utilised a 
combination of automated searching of on-
line data sources based on text mining9 and 
artifi  cial intelligence (AI) methods as well as 
research in secondary data to evaluate the 
results. The data sources for this part of the 
analysis included research data from aca-
demic publications contained in the Scopus 
database, the Federal Government’s fund-
ing database (Förderkatalog des Bundes),  
the European Commission’s Community Re-
search and Development Information Ser-
vice (CORDIS), as well as current media cov-
erage and specialist news blogs. Horizon scanning revealed signs that, for example, 
some retail chains could be starting to re-
fuse to accept cash and that the use of cash 
might no longer be able to be taken for 
granted, even in its traditional strongholds. 
At the same time, horizon scanning showed 
that initial resistance to the displacement of 
cash was already starting to form.10 The in-
formation obtained through this method 
was supplemented by fi  ndings from semi- 
structured interviews with experts con-
ducted in the period from April to August 
2022.
Megatrend analysis
The megatrend analysis examined highly in-
fl  uential trends with regard to their poten-
tial impact on the requirements of a pay-
ment instrument and the future of cash 
use. Unlike short- term trends, megatrends 
have a long- term and global impact and af-
fect a wide variety of areas in everyday life, 
politics, the economy and society. Evidence 
of megatrends as well as their effects are 
apparent even today, and they have the po-
tential to usher in transformations in a last-
ing way.11 The megatrend analysis was car-
ried out through literature research and an-
alysis. The literature analysis covered ac-
counts of megatrends published by public 
organisations, academic institutions, and 
private sector enterprises. The megatrends 
considered relevant for cash were each 
analysed with regard to their impact on the 
topic of investigation, their causes, and the 
7 Information on these methods can be found in the 
box entitled “Public perspectives on the future of cash” 
on pp. 35ff.
8 For more detailed information on weak signals, see 
Ansoff (1980) and Lasinger and Lasinger (2011).
9 Text mining enables unstructured texts to be ana-
lysed for recurring patterns and new insights.
10 For more detailed information, see Ehrenberg- Silies 
et al. (2024), pp. 60 ff.
11 For a defi  nition of megatrends and further informa-
tion, see, for example, https://www.baks.bund.de/de/
aktuelles/methoden-zur-strategischen-vorausschau- 
megatrendsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
44

pace of their development. This step of the 
analysis suggests, for example, that the “in-
dividualisation” and “pluralisation” meg-
atrends will lead to widening social dispar-
ity, which could in turn result in differing 
expectations of cash among the public. An-
other example of a megatrend is increasing 
digitalisation, which could also lead to a 
further spread of cybercrime.12
Cash cycle stakeholder analysis
Moreover, the aims and scope for action 
among the stakeholders involved in the 
cash cycle13 are key to the construction of 
the scenarios. The cash cycle stakeholder 
analysis was conducted in the form of semi- 
structured interviews with cash cycle stake-
holders.14 Through these interviews, it was 
possible to capture opportunities for innov-
ation and possibilities for cutting costs as 
well as potential incentives and parameters 
for maintaining cash infrastructure. For ex-
ample, costs could be reduced by imple-
menting measures that make the routes 
travelled by cash- in- transit companies 
shorter or more fl  exible.15
Framework conditions analysis
The framework conditions analysis verifi  ed 
whether the infl  uencing factors that were 
identifi  ed in the previous steps covered all 
of the categories of a STEEP+VL analytical 
model. STEEP+VL consists of the categories 
Social, Technological, Economic, Ecological, 
Political, Values and Legal. This made it pos-
sible to consolidate any infl  uencing factors 
that were identifi  ed simultaneously in sev-
eral of the preceding analyses. In addition, 
this step of the analysis highlighted any cat-
egories in which only a small number of in-
fl  uencing factors could be identifi  ed and 
that thus called for further research. For ex-
ample, based on the outcome of this analy-
sis, further research was conducted into le-
gislative proposals from the European Com-mission in the areas of cash acceptance, 
access to cash, and the digital euro.16
Overall, the previous steps of the process 
resulted in the identifi  cation of a total of 49 
infl  uencing factors, which were narrowed 
down to the ten most important key factors 
in the subsequent step, the cross- impact 
analysis.
Cross- impact analysis
Each individual infl  uencing factor impacts 
the topic of investigation to a different de-
gree. In order to analyse the direction and 
magnitude of their impact, a cross- impact 
analysis was carried out. Cross- impact ana-
lyses originate from the fi  eld of technology 
foresight. Based on expert assessments, this 
method discusses and analyses interactions 
between infl  uencing factors within complex 
systems.17
In the “Cash of the future” study, this analy-
sis was also used to narrow the scope down 
to core key factors. In this context, experts 
from a variety of specialist areas were in-
volved. Representatives of organisations, 
enterprises, special interest groups and re-
search institutions related to the topic of in-
vestigation were invited to participate in a 
workshop. In two groups, they discussed a 
total of 15 infl  uencing factors that had been 
preselected as the most relevant through a 
survey of the experts. As a result of the 
cross- impact analysis, ten key factors were 
identifi  ed. These are cash acceptance, ac-
12 For more detailed information, see Ehrenberg- Silies 
et al. (2024).
13 For a description of the cash cycle in Germany, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2011).
14 The interviews took place in the period from June 
to July 2022 and lasted between 60 and 90 minutes 
each. The selection of interviewees covered commer-
cial banks, printing works, cash- in- transit companies, 
and digital service providers in the cash cycle.
15 See Ehrenberg- Silies et al. (2024), pp. 80 ff.
16 See European Commission (2023a, 2023b).
17 See Weimer- Jehle (2015).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
45

three devised scenarios are not forecasts and 
it  is uncertain whether any of the develop -
ments described will occur. However, the scen -
arios show data- based potential developments 
for cash and the resulting consequences for 
society  . In the study, evidence was found for all 
the developments described that makes them 
possible and plausible. Cash plays a role in all 
of the scenarios, albeit a minor one in some 
cases. No evidence was found that suggests it 
is plausible or likely that cash will disappear 
completely from the payment landscape in fu -
ture. Nevertheless, the scenarios also show 
that pressure on cash and the cash cycle will 
increase. In the absence of appropriate meas -
ures, a downward spiral could be set in mo -
tion. The public’s freedom to be able to choose 
between paying either with cash or cashless 
means of payment depending on their prefer -
ence should therefore no longer be seen as a 
given for the future.Therefore, the scenarios should be the starting 
point for further analysis of the future of cash. 
If genuine freedom of choice of payment in -
strument is to be maintained for all members 
of society, in order to ensure a stable supply of 
cash in the event of a crisis, amongst other 
things, all of the scenarios reveal the need for 
action by stakeholders in the cash cycle and in 
politics. The scenarios subsequently enable 
starting points for measures to be identified 
that will help maintain cash as an attractive, 
widely accepted, easily accessible and competi -
tive means of payment.
As part of the Eurosystem’s cash strategy, the 
Bundesbank is committed to ensuring that cash 
remains available and is generally accepted. As 
a central and neutral participant in the cash 
cycle –  with a statutory mandate to supply 
cash – it will help shape cash payments in Ger -
many in a forward- looking way and will strive 
to ensure that cash remains a core physical 
product. The Bundesbank will continue to pro -Scenarios reveal 
the need for 
action by all 
stakeholders in 
the cash cycle 
and in politics
The Bundesbank 
will help shape 
cash payments 
in Germany in a 
forward- looking 
way and is com -
mitted to ensur -
ing cash remains 
a core physical 
productcess to cash, the cash cycle, consumer re-
quirements, retail, the digital euro, the preva-
lence of cashless means of payment, trust, 
crises and uncertainty, and societal good.18
The Delphi method
The Delphi method refers to a multi- stage 
systematic survey of experts that reveals 
consensus and disagreement with regard to 
future developments. For the study dis-
cussed here, a two- stage online survey was 
conducted amongst experts from the fi  elds 
of academia and foresight, the cash cycle, 
and social associations.19 For the question-
naire, the authors of the study formulated 
hypotheses on the future development of 
each of the previously defi  ned key factors 
based on the results obtained so far.20 In 
the fi  rst stage of the survey, the participants 
assessed these hypotheses with regard to 
their probability of occurrence. As part of the online survey, participants were also 
asked to estimate what proportion cash 
would represent in the future payment mix. 
These estimates were in turn used in the 
scenarios. The results of the fi  rst stage of 
the survey were presented back to the par-
ticipants in the second stage. They were 
then given the opportunity to make new 
assessments in light of the overall results 
from the fi  rst stage.
18 The “societal good” key factor describes the par-
ticular signifi  cance of cash for the inclusion of various 
groups in society and also as a contingency solution 
during times of crisis.
19 The fi  rst stage of the survey was conducted in De-
cember 2022 and the second stage of the survey was 
conducted in March 2023. Out of a total of 101 per-
sons invited to participate, 67 took part in the fi  rst 
stage. Of these, 55 agreed to participate in the second 
stage. Ultimately, 41 persons completed the second 
stage of the survey.
20 In both stages of the survey, the questions on the 
cash cycle key factor were answered only by experts in 
this area (34 in the fi  rst stage and 26 in the second 
stage).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
46

vide an efficient and future- proof branch net -
work. In addition, it provides a range of ser -
vices tailored to the needs of its cash business 
management partners.
In addition, the Bundesbank is stepping up co -
operation with a wide range of stakeholders in 
the cash cycle. To this end, it is inviting high-  
level representatives from the associations of 
cash actors, public authorities as well as other 
experts to the National Cash Forum for the first 
time in February 2024 to discuss relevant as -
pects of cash payments. The Bundesbank is 
also seeking dialogue with civil society about 
the desired future of cash and necessary activ -
ities. On the basis of the “Cash of the future” 
study, all stakeholders can discuss desirable de -
velopments together, draw up a tangible future concept and develop and establish appropriate 
measures. The scenarios and the study also 
provide a tool for exchanging ideas with civil 
society about the societal benefits of cash and 
an adequate cash supply level.
The study represents only part of the Bundes -
bank’s activities to identify developments con -
cerning cash. The Bundesbank will continue to 
investigate the use of cash by the general pub -
lic, as well as access to and acceptance of cash 
in Germany. These analyses enable changes in 
cash payments to be identified and evaluated 
at an early stage. They are and will remain im -
portant instruments for the Bundesbank to per -
form its statutory mandate to supply cash. Fur -
thermore, society and policymakers are also 
invited to discuss the future of cash.In doing so, the 
Bundesbank 
relies on cooper -
ation with stake -
holders in the 
cash cycle …… and on fur -
ther analyses of 
the development 
of cash
List of references
Ansoff, H. I. (1980), Strategic issue management, Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 1, No 2, 
pp. 131-148.
Atzler, E. and F. Stippler (2023), Warum Banken jetzt auf Tausende von Geldautomaten verzichten 
wollen, Handelsblatt, 3  March 2023, available at https://www.handelsblatt.com/finanzen/
banken-versicherungen/banken/bargeld-warum-banken-jetzt-auf-tausende-geldautomaten- 
verzichten-wollen/28997164.html , last accessed on 5 December 2023.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a), Mobile payment usage in Germany, Monthly Report, January 2023, 
pp. 75-91.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b), Access to cash in Germany: analyses of the spatial availability of 
cash withdrawal facilities, Monthly Report, January 2023, pp. 93-106.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a), Payment behaviour in Germany in 2021.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022b), Access to cash in Germany – results of a representative public 
survey  , Monthly Report, December 2022, pp. 55-66.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2011), The banknote cycle and banknote recycling in Germany, Monthly 
Report, January 2011, pp. 17-27.
Ehrenberg-  Silies, S., M. Bovenschulte, K. Goluchowicz, M. Nerger, J. Czerniak-  Wilmes, T.  Gens-
heimer  and S. Borgstedt (2024), Bargeld der Zukunft, Deutsche Bundesbank.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
47

European Central Bank (2022a), Study on the payment attitudes of consumers in the euro area 
(SPACE).
European Central Bank (2022b), Guaranteeing freedom of payment choice: access to cash in the 
euro area, Economic Bulletin, Issue 5/ 2022.
European Commission (2023a), Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the 
Council on the legal tender of euro banknotes and coins, COM/ 2023/ 364 final.
European Commission (2023b), Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the 
Council on the establishment of the digital euro, COM/ 2023/ 369 final.
European Commission (2018), The Megatrends Hub, available at https://knowledge4policy.ec.
europa.eu/foresight/tool/megatrends-hub_en , last accessed on 22 January 2024.
Fraunhofer Institute for Systems and Innovation Research ISI (2022), Studie zur Institutionalisierung 
von Strategischer Vorausschau als Prozess und Methode in der deutschen Bundesregierung.
Heinhaus,  A. (2023), Wenn Banken kein Bargeld mehr annehmen, available at https://www.
tagesschau.de/wirtschaft/bargeld-verschwindet-100.html , last accessed on 22 January 2024.
Kopp, M. (2023), Warum in Hamburg immer mehr Geldautomaten verschwinden, Hamburger 
Abendblatt, 18  September 2023, available at https://www.abendblatt.de/hamburg/wirtschaft/
article239598141/Warum-in-Hamburg-immer-mehr-Geldautomaten-verschwinden.html , last 
accessed  on 22 January 2024.
Kosow, H. and R. Gaßner (2008), Methoden der Zukunfts- und Szenarioanalyse: Überblick, Be -
wertung und Auswahlkriterien, WerkstattBericht, No 103, Institut für Zukunftsstudien und Techno -
logiebewertung .
Lasinger, D. and M. Lasinger (2011), Der Signalnavigator: Signale frühzeitig erkennen und für Inno-
vationen nutzen – Ein Leitfaden mit Best- Practice- Beispielen und Gestaltungsempfehlungen, 
Gabler  Verlag, Wiesbaden .
Niederberger, M. and O. Renn (2018), Das Gruppendelphi-  Verfahren: Vom Konzept bis zur Anwen-
dung, Springer VS, Wiesbaden .
Störmer, E., L. Bontoux, M. Krzysztofowicz, E. Florescu, A- K. Bock and F. Scapolo (2020), Chapter 12 
– Foresight – Using Science and Evidence to Anticipate and Shape the Future, pp. 128-142, in: 
V. Sucha and M. Sienkiewicz (eds.), Science for Policy Handbook, Elsevier.
Tagesschau (2021), Wie das Filialnetz schrumpft, available at https://www.tagesschau.de/
wirtschaft/unternehmen/commerzbank-bankfilialen-schliessen-101.html , last accessed on 
22 January 2024.
Weimert,  B. and S.  Römer (2021), Bestandsaufnahme der Szenariomethodik – Ansätze einer 
kritischen Analyse, Zeitschrift für Zukunftsforschung, No 1, pp. 81-123.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
48

Weimer-  Jehle, W. (2015), Cross- Impact-  Analyse, pp. 243-258, in: M. Niederberger and S. Wasser -
mann (eds.), Methoden der Experten- und Stakeholdereinbindung in der sozialwissenschaftlichen 
Forschung, Springer VS, Wiesbaden.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
49

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
50

Statistical  
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
1•

Contents
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5 •
2. External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5 •
3. General economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6 •
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8 •
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10 •
3. Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14 •
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18 •
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche 
Bundes bank) in Germany  .............................................................................................  20 •
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24 •
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26 •
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28 •
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30 •
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32 •
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34 •
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36 •
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36 •
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38 •
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38 •
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39 •
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
2•

V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42 •
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42 •
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest  ....................................................................  43 •
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43 •
3. Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43 •
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44 •
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49 •
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50 •
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51 •
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52 •
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52 •
5. Yields on German securities  .........................................................................................  53 •
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53 •
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54 •
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55 •
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56 •
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57 •
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  .. 58 •
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  ........................................................................................................  58 •
3. General government: budgetary development  .............................................................  59 •
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59 •
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60 •
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
3•

7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61 •
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ....... 61 •
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62 •
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62 •
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63 •
12. Maastricht debt by creditor  .........................................................................................  63 •
13. Maastricht debt by instrument .....................................................................................  64 •
14. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category  ............................  65 •
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  66 •
2. Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  67 •
3. Orders received by industry  .........................................................................................  68 •
4. Orders received by construction  ..................................................................................  69 •
5. Retail trade turnover  ....................................................................................................  69 •
6. Labour market  .............................................................................................................  70 •
7. Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  71 •
8. Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  72 •
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  72 •
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  73 •
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  74 •
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  75 •
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  76 •
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  77 •
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ................................  78 •
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............  78 •
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  79 •
7. External position of the Bundesbank ............................................................................  80 •
8. External positions of enterprises  ..................................................................................  81 •
9. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  82 •
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage of 
Economic  and Monetary Union  ...................................................................................  82 •
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  83 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
5•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
M3 3
M1 M23-month
moving average
(centred)MFI lending,
totalMFI lending to
enterprises
and
householdsMonetary
capital
formation  4 €STR  5,6Yield on Euro-
pean govern-
ment bonds
outstanding  7
Period Annual percentage change % p.a. as a monthly average
2022 Apr. 8.6 6.6 6.4 6.3 6.4 5.0 – 0.2 – 0.58 1.4
May 8.3 6.3 6.1 6.2 6.2 5.1 – 0.1 – 0.59 1.7
June 7.5 6.2 6.0 6.0 6.3 5.4 – 0.2 – 0.58 2.2
July 7.0 6.1 5.8 6.0 5.9 5.4 – 0.2 – 0.51 1.9
Aug. 6.8 6.3 6.2 6.0 5.7 5.7 – 0.3 – 0.09 1.8
Sep. 5.2 5.9 6.0 5.7 5.5 5.7 – 0.3 0.36 2.6
Oct. 3.5 5.0 4.9 5.2 5.1 5.3 – 0.7 0.66 3.0
Nov. 2.2 4.5 4.6 4.4 4.8 5.2 – 0.1 1.37 2.7
Dec. 0.2 3.4 3.8 3.8 3.9 4.4 0.6 1.57 2.8
2023 Jan. – 1.3 2.5 3.0 3.1 3.0 3.7 1.3 1.90 2.9
Feb. – 3.1 1.7 2.5 2.5 2.5 3.3 1.9 2.28 3.0
Mar. – 4.7 1.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.9 2.4 2.57 3.1
Apr. – 5.7 0.5 1.4 1.5 1.4 2.4 2.4 2.90 3.0
May – 7.0 – 0.1 1.0 0.9 0.9 2.3 3.3 3.08 3.0
June – 8.0 – 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.4 1.6 3.6 3.24 3.0
July – 9.1 – 1.4 – 0.4 – 0.4 0.1 1.3 4.0 3.40 3.1
Aug. – 10.4 – 2.4 – 1.3 – 0.9 – 0.2 0.7 4.5 3.64 3.2
Sep. – 9.9 – 2.2 – 1.2 – 1.2 – 0.4 0.3 4.9 3.75 3.3
Oct. – 10.0 – 2.2 – 1.0 – 1.0 – 0.5 0.4 5.6 3.90 3.5
Nov. – 9.5 – 1.8 – 0.9 ... – 0.6 0.4 5.5 3.90 3.3
Dec. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3.90 2.7
1 Source: ECB.  2 Seasonally adjusted.  3 Excluding money market fund shares/units,
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by
non-euro area residents.  4 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs.  5 EuroShort-Term Rate.  6 See also footnotes to Table VI.3, p. 43●. 7 GDP-weighted yield on
ten-year government bonds. Countries included: DE, FR, NL, BE, AT, FI, IE, PT, ES, IT,
GR, SK, CY, SI.
2. External transactions and positions *
Selected items of the euro area balance of payments  r Euro exchange rates  1
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate  3
Balanceof which:
Goods BalanceDirect
investmentPortfolio
investmentFinancial
derivatives  2Other
investmentReserve
assetsReference
rate 
vis-á-vis the
US dollar Nominal Real  4
Period € million EUR 1 = USD ... Q1 1999 = 100
2022 Apr. –15,756 –13,928 –42,131 +26,022 +38,111 +28,166 –133,673 – 756 1.0819 95.0 90.1
May –29,047 – 8,030 +63,713 +116,343 +38,075 + 555 –92,425 + 1,165 1.0579 95.4 90.5
June – 3,894 – 8,502 + 8,081 + 7,902 –98,776 + 6,263 +90,785 + 1,906 1.0566 95.7 90.7
July –12,413 –13,267 +21,794 –12,151 +46,387 + 9,947 –24,023 + 1,634 1.0179 93.9 89.2
Aug. –26,215 –30,821 – 7,004 –24,607 –60,652 +14,505 +61,593 + 2,158 1.0128 93.4 88.9
Sep. – 4,932 –12,954 –29,124 +83,487 –166,369 +13,773 +36,514 + 3,470 0.9904 93.9 89.9
Oct. –14,084 – 7,689 +19,115 +10,575 –21,581 + 3,622 +22,577 + 3,923 0.9826 94.5 91.3
Nov. + 6,620 + 7,538 –19,957 – 6,043 –29,853 + 4,294 +11,130 + 515 1.0201 95.7 92.3
Dec. +16,618 +10,484 +61,518 +27,760 +64,795 – 7,854 –27,989 + 4,805 1.0589 96.8 92.6
2023 Jan. –11,898 –14,614 +23,259 – 1,623 +30,752 – 2,671 + 5,548 – 8,747 1.0769 97.1 92.8
Feb. +12,209 +21,058 –11,665 +32,164 –25,271 +12,381 –19,593 –11,347 1.0715 97.0 93.0
Mar. +30,117 +39,164 +27,851 + 3,447 –101,886 + 5,553 +119,277 + 1,460 1.0706 97.3 93.2
Apr. + 7,608 + 6,740 –14,564 –15,967 +65,460 – 1,372 –60,820 – 1,866 1.0968 98.4 94.1
May – 5,275 +15,347 –14,876 –55,930 +49,343 + 7,307 –16,952 + 1,356 1.0868 98.0 93.5
June +35,974 +32,124 +79,198 +79,946 –47,138 –10,711 +54,708 + 2,393 1.0840 98.2 93.8
July +31,244 +21,430 +32,923 –26,345 +47,313 – 8,869 +20,420 + 404 1.1058 99.2 95.0
Aug. +30,615 +21,338 +21,461 +11,866 –12,167 + 3,277 +17,175 + 1,310 1.0909 99.0 95.0
Sep. +35,036 +24,844 +46,023 +24,998 –61,134 + 2,181 +83,846 – 3,868 1.0684 98.5 94.6
Oct. +30,051 +32,891 +31,797 +17,470 –12,198 +23,791 – 1,033 + 3,768 1.0563 98.0 p 94.1
Nov. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0808 98.7 p 94.6
Dec. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0903 98.2 p 94.0
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund's Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Monthly averages, see also Tables
XII. 9 and 11, pp. 82●/ 83●.  2 Including employee stock options.  3 Bundesbank cal-culation. Vis-á-vis the currencies of the extended EER group of tranding partners (fixed
composition).  4 Based on consumer price indices.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
6•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
3. General economic indicators
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Croatia Latvia
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
2021 5.9 6.9 3.2 7.2 2.8 6.4 8.4 15.1 8.3 13.8 6.7
2022 3.4 3.0 1.8 –0.5 1.6 2.5 5.6 9.4 3.7 6.4 3.4
2023 ... ... –0.3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
2022 Q2 4.1 3.8 1.6 0.2 2.6 4.0 7.1 9.3 5.0 9.3 4.4
Q3 2.5 2.0 1.2 –0.5 1.3 1.3 3.7 9.4 2.5 5.5 0.8
Q4 1.9 1.4 0.2 –4.2 –0.5 0.3 3.7 10.2 1.3 3.2 1.6
2023 Q1 1.3 1.7 0.2 –3.7 0.6 1.1 2.0 2.6 2.3 1.6 –0.0
Q2 0.6 1.3 –0.4 –2.9 –0.6 0.7 2.8 –0.3 0.0 2.6 –1.1
Q3 0.0 1.4 –0.8 –3.9 –1.5 0.3 1.8 –5.8 –0.0 2.8 –0.7
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
2020 –7.7 –3.8 –9.6 –2.8 –3.2 –10.9 –2.1 14.5 –11.5 –3.4 –1.8
2021 8.9 16.8 4.6 12.8 4.2 5.9 10.4 28.3 12.2 6.4 6.5
2022 2.3 –0.7 –0.3 –2.3 4.0 –0.2 2.5 18.9 0.4 1.6 0.8
2022 Q2 2.0 –5.1 –1.3 2.6 8.0 –0.2 3.1 14.9 2.1 2.5 3.6
Q3 3.4 –3.6 1.9 –5.0 3.5 0.2 3.9 21.0 0.0 2.5 –2.6
Q4 2.2 –0.2 –0.6 –10.4 –0.6 –0.4 –1.7 29.8 –2.2 –1.4 –1.2
2023 Q1 0.3 –2.9 0.4 –9.6 1.0 –0.5 2.3 7.8 –1.5 –1.7 –6.0
Q2 –1.2 –4.3 –0.3 –14.3 –2.8 1.5 1.2 4.2 –3.9 0.0 –6.6
Q3 –4.7 –6.9 –3.1 –11.6 –1.7 0.8 –0.2 –21.6 –2.6 –0.4 –5.3
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
2021 81.4 80.1 84.9 78.1 81.2 81.1 75.7 78.0 76.5 75.0 75.3
2022 82.2 79.1 85.2 71.7 81.0 81.8 75.9 79.8 78.4 77.0 75.0
2023 80.5 75.7 83.4 67.3 76.6 81.1 75.2 ... 76.9 77.2 72.9
2022 Q3 81.9 78.9 85.1 74.7 80.7 81.7 74.5 79.2 78.4 75.8 75.7
Q4 81.4 77.2 84.9 71.5 80.8 80.6 75.5 79.8 77.9 74.5 73.3
2023 Q1 81.4 76.7 84.6 71.0 79.0 81.0 74.8 79.2 77.4 77.6 72.6
Q2 81.2 77.3 84.2 70.0 76.3 82.0 73.8 ... 77.4 78.1 73.8
Q3 80.0 75.0 82.9 63.5 77.4 80.6 76.3 ... 76.9 78.4 72.7
Q4 79.4 73.9 81.9 64.7 73.7 80.7 75.9 ... 75.9 74.7 72.3
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
2021 7.7 e 6.3 3.6 e 6.2 e 7.7 e 7.9 e 14.8 e 6.3 e 9.5 e 7.6 e 7.6
2022 6.7 e 5.5 p 3.1 e 5.6 e 6.8 e 7.3 e 12.5 e 4.5 e 8.1 e 6.8 e 6.9
2023 ... ... ... e 6.3 ... ... ... e 4.4 ... ... ...
2023 July 6.5 5.3 3.0 7.4 7.4 7.4 11.0 4.4 7.7 6.5 6.6
Aug. 6.5 5.3 3.0 7.3 7.3 7.4 10.6 4.5 7.5 6.5 6.6
Sep. 6.5 5.4 3.1 6.5 7.4 7.3 10.1 4.7 7.6 6.5 6.5
Oct. 6.5 5.6 3.1 6.2 7.5 7.3 9.4 4.8 7.7 6.4 6.5
Nov. 6.4 5.6 3.1 6.1 7.6 7.3 9.4 4.8 7.5 6.4 6.6
Dec. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4.9 ... ... ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2021 2.6 3.2 5 3.2 4.5 2.1 2.1 0.6 2.4 1.9 2.7 3.2
2022 8.4 10.3 8.7 19.4 7.2 5.9 9.3 8.1 8.7 10.7 17.2
2023 6 5.4 2.3 6.0 9.1 4.3 5.7 4.2 5.2 5.9 8.4 9.1
2023 July 5.3 1.7 6.5 6.2 4.2 5.1 3.5 4.6 6.3 8.0 6.6
Aug. 5.2 2.4 6.4 4.3 3.1 5.7 3.5 4.9 5.5 8.4 5.6
Sep. 4.3 0.7 4.3 3.9 3.0 5.7 2.4 5.0 5.6 7.4 3.6
Oct. 2.9 –1.7 3.0 5.0 2.4 4.5 3.8 3.6 1.8 6.7 2.3
Nov. 2.4 –0.8 2.3 4.1 0.7 3.9 2.9 2.5 0.6 5.5 1.1
Dec. 2.9 0.5 3.8 4.3 1.3 4.1 3.7 3.2 0.5 5.4 0.9
General government financial balance 7
As a percentage of GDP
2021 –5.2 –5.4 –3.6 –2.5 –2.8 –6.5 –7.0 –1.5 –8.8 –2.5 –7.2
2022 –3.6 –3.5 –2.5 –1.0 –0.8 –4.8 –2.4 1.7 –8.0 0.1 –4.6
2023 ... ... –2.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
General government debt 7
As a percentage of GDP
2020 97.2 111.8 68.8 18.6 74.7 114.6 207.0 58.1 154.9 86.8 42.2
2021 94.7 108.0 69.0 17.8 72.5 112.9 195.0 54.4 147.1 78.1 44.0
2022 90.9 104.3 66.1 18.5 73.3 111.8 172.6 44.4 141.7 68.2 41.0
Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, European Central Bank, Federal Statistical
Office, Bundesbank calculations. Latest data are partly based on press reports and areprovisional.  1 Euro area: quarterly data seasonally and calendar adjusted.  2 Manu-
facturing, mining and energy: adjusted for working-day variations.  3 Manufacturing:

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
7•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
6.3 7.2 12.6 6.2 4.2 5.7 4.8 8.2 6.4 9.9 2021
2.4 1.4 8.2 4.3 4.8 6.8 1.7 2.5 5.8 5.1 2022
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2023
2.4 2.3 10.6 5.2 6.5 8.2 1.4 4.4 6.9 6.7 2022 Q2
2.1 2.1 6.4 3.0 2.0 5.0 1.5 0.9 5.5 4.2 Q3
0.1 –2.5 7.3 2.9 1.8 3.1 1.2 –0.2 3.8 2.3 Q4
–2.4 –1.4 6.4 1.9 1.9 2.7 0.5 1.0 4.5 3.0 2023 Q1
0.7 –1.5 5.9 –0.2 –1.4 2.0 1.5 1.6 2.1 2.2 Q2
0.2 –1.8 7.1 –0.8 –1.9 1.7 1.2 1.1 1.4 2.5 Q3
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
–1.9 –10.8 –0.3 –3.9 –5.9 –7.3 –8.5 –5.2 –9.8 –7.3 2020
20.2 8.4 0.1 5.0 11.3 3.5 10.3 10.2 7.5 6.4 2021
9.4 –1.3 2.8 2.6 6.9 –0.0 –4.0 1.2 3.0 1.2 2022
9.2 –1.6 –4.0 4.7 8.4 2.0 –3.1 2.8 5.0 3.1 2022 Q2
10.0 –0.3 7.7 2.4 5.5 1.3 –1.6 1.7 4.6 –0.8 Q3
–2.5 –3.4 10.0 1.3 2.7 –0.3 –8.4 –5.7 0.7 –0.1 Q4
–11.7 –4.5 13.6 –3.6 1.0 1.3 –3.5 –3.5 1.6 –0.6 2023 Q1
–0.4 –7.0 6.6 –9.4 –0.4 –4.9 0.5 –4.2 –2.1 1.4 Q2
–5.0 –7.5 1.7 –8.0 –1.4 –4.9 –0.1 –8.3 –1.8 3.8 Q3
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
76.7 82.0 76.8 82.4 87.1 79.2 82.2 84.5 77.8 51.3 2021
77.4 80.8 64.7 83.7 87.7 81.9 83.3 85.0 78.7 58.2 2022
68.8 73.1 68.1 81.9 85.3 81.7 82.1 83.2 76.9 61.6 2023
76.8 81.4 67.6 83.9 87.9 81.6 83.5 84.1 78.9 58.2 2022 Q3
76.1 79.8 63.6 82.6 85.7 81.6 83.0 84.1 77.2 60.5 Q4
69.7 74.3 65.7 82.9 87.1 81.5 80.2 83.1 77.1 59.8 2023 Q1
70.6 75.5 53.3 82.5 86.3 83.5 84.0 83.9 76.3 60.9 Q2
67.1 72.0 69.4 81.3 84.6 80.9 83.0 83.0 76.2 62.7 Q3
67.9 70.5 84.1 80.9 83.2 80.9 81.0 82.6 77.8 63.1 Q4
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
e 7.1 e 5.4 e 3.4 e 4.2 e 6.2 e 6.8 e 6.9 e 4.8 e 14.8 e 7.5 2021
e 5.9 e 4.6 e 2.9 e 3.6 e 4.8 e 6.2 e 6.2 e 4.0 e 13.0 e 6.8 2022
... ... ... e 3.5 ... e 6.5 ... ... ... ... 2023
6.3 5.2 2.4 3.6 5.7 6.3 5.8 3.8 12.0 6.1 2023 July
6.7 5.3 2.5 3.6 5.4 6.3 5.8 3.8 11.9 6.0 Aug.
6.9 5.5 2.6 3.7 5.5 6.6 5.8 3.9 12.0 5.9 Sep.
6.5 5.6 2.5 3.6 5.1 6.6 5.8 4.1 12.0 5.9 Oct.
6.5 5.7 2.5 3.5 4.9 6.6 5.8 4.2 11.9 5.8 Nov.
... ... ... 3.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... Dec.
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
4.6 3.5 0.7 2.8 2.8 0.9 2.8 2.0 3.0 2.3 2021
18.9 8.2 6.1 11.6 8.6 8.1 12.1 9.3 8.3 8.1 2022
8.7 2.9 5.6 4.1 7.7 5.3 11.0 7.2 3.4 3.9 2023
7.2 2.0 5.6 5.3 7.0 4.3 10.3 5.7 2.1 2.4 2023 July
6.4 3.5 5.0 3.4 7.5 5.3 9.6 6.1 2.4 3.1 Aug.
4.1 3.4 4.9 –0.3 5.8 4.8 9.0 7.1 3.3 4.3 Sep.
3.1 2.1 4.2 –1.0 4.9 3.2 7.8 6.6 3.5 3.6 Oct.
2.3 2.1 3.9 1.4 4.9 2.2 6.9 4.5 3.3 2.4 Nov.
1.6 3.2 3.7 1.0 5.7 1.9 6.6 3.8 3.3 1.9 Dec.
General government financial balance 7
As a percentage of GDP
–1.1 0.6 –7.5 –2.2 –5.8 –2.9 –5.2 –4.6 –6.7 –1.9 2021
–0.7 –0.3 –5.7 –0.1 –3.5 –0.3 –2.0 –3.0 –4.7 2.4 2022
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2023
General government debt 7
As a percentage of GDP
46.2 24.6 52.2 54.7 83.0 134.9 58.9 79.6 120.3 114.9 2020
43.4 24.5 54.0 51.7 82.5 124.5 61.1 74.4 116.8 99.3 2021
38.1 24.7 52.3 50.1 78.4 112.4 57.8 72.3 111.6 85.6 2022
quarterly data seasonally adjusted. Data collection at the beginning of the quarter.
4 Monthly data seasonally adjusted.  5 Influenced by a temporary reduction of valueadded tax between July and December 2020.  6 Including Croatia from 2023 onwards.
7 According to Maastricht Treaty definition.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
8•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts *
a) Euro area 1
€ billion
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2022 Apr. 111.9 96.7 20.2 15.2 5.2 –101.8 –79.5 22.3 6.2 –10.5 –0.2 2.1 14.7
May 107.2 65.1 –18.8 42.1 49.5 –51.3 40.8 92.2 –18.1 3.1 –3.2 –21.5 3.6
June 116.2 83.6 –8.8 32.6 33.5 99.4 –26.0 –125.4 22.2 –4.8 –0.4 1.6 25.8
July 29.8 58.6 –3.0 –28.8 –28.8 –27.9 63.5 91.3 5.3 –11.7 –0.4 –3.2 20.5
Aug. –10.7 26.1 –18.8 –36.8 –31.2 46.8 69.2 22.5 –15.2 –22.1 0.8 2.1 4.0
Sep. 86.6 83.1 –0.1 3.4 2.2 –52.8 –199.5 –146.7 14.7 –16.4 –0.4 4.0 27.5
Oct. –12.5 0.1 –6.1 –12.6 –9.7 – 0.8 169.5 170.3 –12.3 –14.7 0.1 11.2 –8.9
Nov. 93.0 84.0 31.0 9.0 14.3 14.8 –40.4 –55.1 33.9 1.7 0.2 34.0 –1.9
Dec. –121.5 –88.3 –0.9 –33.2 –41.3 1.1 –256.0 –257.0 47.5 10.0 0.1 0.7 36.8
2023 Jan. –10.1 –0.7 –14.4 –9.5 –4.2 11.6 126.7 115.1 30.0 –6.2 2.2 57.3 –23.3
Feb. 7.5 –13.3 3.2 20.9 29.8 8.3 0.1 –8.2 15.8 –1.3 1.6 10.3 5.3
Mar. 33.8 41.1 11.7 –7.2 –9.7 75.1 112.5 37.3 28.2 10.8 1.3 5.6 10.6
Apr. – 9.7 23.8 29.5 –33.5 –29.2 –20.7 –21.2 –0.6 10.5 9.3 1.4 3.9 –4.1
May – 0.0 45.7 33.3 –45.7 –50.0 4.4 22.2 17.8 37.6 –0.3 2.3 27.1 8.5
June 3.0 –11.3 –12.2 14.3 21.1 112.1 15.9 –96.1 43.8 1.2 2.8 26.8 13.0
July –46.7 6.7 5.4 –53.4 –53.0 33.3 106.7 73.4 32.7 0.9 2.9 17.1 11.9
Aug. –56.6 –67.3 –12.6 10.8 13.5 33.5 61.8 28.3 22.2 –2.4 4.0 11.1 9.4
Sep. 35.4 31.9 –1.2 3.5 2.6 61.9 –106.9 –168.8 43.3 15.7 5.0 11.0 11.6
Oct. –35.7 5.2 –11.1 –40.9 –40.4 57.5 51.8 –5.8 29.9 –9.3 4.7 26.9 7.6
Nov. 65.2 84.8 15.1 –19.7 –15.8 49.2 48.6 –0.6 34.1 –6.9 5.7 40.2 –4.9
b) German contribution
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2022 Apr. 19.0 18.9 2.7 0.1 –4.5 19.1 –13.0 –32.1 4.4 –2.7 –0.2 3.2 4.1
May 39.1 28.5 3.5 10.6 13.5 –29.8 –0.9 28.9 2.0 –2.4 –0.1 2.0 2.5
June 32.6 25.5 –4.1 7.1 4.8 –22.4 –9.4 13.0 3.8 –3.1 –0.2 –3.8 10.8
July 18.2 30.6 10.6 –12.4 –13.4 42.7 4.3 –38.5 9.3 –2.0 –0.2 8.5 3.0
Aug. 26.0 39.4 –0.2 –13.4 –11.4 –50.3 6.7 57.1 3.0 –0.0 –0.1 0.8 2.3
Sep. 21.5 23.1 0.1 –1.7 –4.5 –27.4 1.6 29.0 4.1 –0.3 –0.0 –0.6 5.0
Oct. 12.8 10.5 –0.2 2.3 1.9 45.1 20.4 –24.7 –7.6 –1.2 0.2 3.2 –9.8
Nov. 25.4 26.2 1.4 –0.9 0.8 38.0 8.9 –29.1 9.8 1.9 0.2 7.1 0.6
Dec. –28.8 –19.6 –2.4 –9.3 –8.2 –37.1 –71.9 –34.8 –0.5 –3.7 0.4 –1.9 4.8
2023 Jan. 27.5 16.9 –0.2 10.7 8.9 63.0 29.8 –33.3 –14.3 2.7 1.0 3.1 –21.0
Feb. 9.2 8.3 –0.2 0.9 1.8 58.4 –2.0 –60.3 3.3 0.6 1.2 –2.1 3.5
Mar. 4.8 8.1 6.4 –3.4 –3.7 –12.4 10.5 23.0 15.5 6.0 1.6 4.4 3.5
Apr. – 3.7 13.0 1.2 –16.7 –20.2 62.7 –15.2 –77.9 5.0 2.0 1.5 –3.0 4.5
May 5.0 11.3 –1.3 –6.3 –4.7 9.6 16.5 6.9 16.9 2.7 2.2 6.1 5.8
June 1.5 –1.9 4.1 3.4 5.4 7.6 –6.6 –14.3 9.7 –0.9 2.7 –0.3 8.2
July 5.1 6.8 –1.1 –1.7 –4.7 34.0 8.3 –25.7 24.9 –0.3 3.0 10.2 12.0
Aug. – 6.8 –5.0 –6.1 –1.8 0.3 25.7 –5.3 –31.0 6.6 –2.7 2.7 0.2 6.4
Sep. – 8.2 1.7 0.8 –9.9 –13.3 – 0.1 –2.8 –2.7 21.1 0.1 2.9 11.6 6.4
Oct. – 2.0 0.1 –0.2 –2.1 –5.2 16.2 4.9 –11.3 11.8 –0.1 3.0 5.9 3.0
Nov. 12.1 12.7 –1.1 –0.6 1.8 15.9 –0.9 –16.8 11.3 3.6 3.4 1.0 3.3
* The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also the "Notes on the figures" in the "Explanatory notes" of the
Statistical Series Banking Statistics).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Excluding MFIs' portfolios.  3 Afterdeduction of inter-MFI participations.  4 Including the counterparts of monetary
liabilities of central governments.  5 Including the monetary liabilities of central
governments (Post Office, Treasury).  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.  7 Paper held
by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.  8 Less German MFIs' holdings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
9•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
a) Euro area 1
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2
Money stock M1
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments Total  4of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue Total Total TotalCurrency
in circu-
lationOvernight
deposits  5Deposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 years  5Deposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  5,6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  2,7,8Debt secur-
ities with
maturities
of up to
2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)
(net)  2,7 Period
–22.1 –99.7 0.0 103.1 65.2 64.0 11.2 52.8 –1.1 2.3 25.1 20.2 16.6 2022 Apr.
–28.9 56.2 0.0 53.6 63.4 67.3 7.8 59.6 –15.9 11.9 4.7 –10.1 – 5.2 May
69.6 65.7 0.0 73.3 79.6 52.3 6.6 45.7 24.1 3.1 –32.5 –1.0 11.2 June
–31.2 –138.3 0.0 159.6 126.7 74.8 8.6 66.2 46.7 5.1 23.7 –2.1 18.1 July
–80.3 68.2 0.0 79.0 71.5 20.2 –4.6 24.8 41.3 10.0 –22.6 6.8 7.4 Aug.
7.3 19.8 0.0 1.6 – 1.7 –100.8 –1.4 –99.4 99.7 – 0.6 –19.5 –8.4 21.7 Sep.
– 5.4 65.6 0.0 –57.6 –76.8 –157.2 –0.4 –156.9 85.4 – 5.0 4.4 36.7 –25.5 Oct.
–10.5 –1.7 0.0 69.8 20.6 –30.3 –3.5 –26.8 59.2 – 8.3 27.4 22.3 16.4 Nov.
–84.5 –63.4 0.0 3.3 13.1 –61.5 11.6 –73.1 59.8 14.8 –46.5 2.8 10.4 Dec.
–38.7 125.7 0.0 –133.4 –149.4 –231.6 –13.3 –218.4 76.0 6.2 35.1 6.6 – 8.0 2023 Jan.
20.3 21.9 0.0 –42.0 –63.4 –135.5 –3.5 –132.0 72.1 0.0 – 2.2 –6.4 29.8 Feb.
30.5 36.5 0.0 16.2 9.5 –104.3 3.9 –108.2 119.4 – 5.5 –25.7 20.6 9.4 Mar.
–26.5 –14.3 0.0 – 1.1 –18.3 –53.0 4.1 –57.1 46.1 –11.4 6.7 11.5 0.2 Apr.
–104.5 81.4 0.0 –30.3 –44.8 –94.3 1.7 –96.0 52.9 – 3.5 29.6 1.5 4.1 May
24.6 44.8 0.0 7.0 22.3 –60.9 3.1 –64.0 94.4 –11.2 –11.2 –6.1 – 3.5 June
–29.4 –2.5 0.0 0.7 –28.1 –90.8 3.0 –93.8 73.3 –10.6 4.1 10.6 – 0.6 July
–20.2 5.4 0.0 –43.0 –44.9 –101.7 –7.7 –94.0 81.1 –24.3 4.4 8.4 1.2 Aug.
35.1 –16.4 0.0 45.6 44.6 –11.6 –3.1 – 8.5 79.8 –23.6 – 5.8 –0.7 – 2.8 Sep.
–28.6 54.3 0.0 –43.0 –88.6 –169.1 –4.2 –165.0 102.2 –21.7 25.2 19.2 10.5 Oct.
–48.3 41.1 0.0 80.3 59.7 24.0 –2.7 26.7 48.4 –12.7 22.3 16.7 –11.1 Nov.
b) German contribution
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10
of which: Components of the money stock
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments TotalIntra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9,11Currency
in circu-
lation TotalOvernight
depositsDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  7,8maturities
with
maturities
of up to 2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)(net)  7 Period
– 3.0 32.9 3.4 2.3 3.7 – 3.4 10.4 – 0.4 – 2.0 – 0.2 – 0.6 2022 Apr.
22.5 – 30.3 3.4 2.7 15.1 22.5 – 7.4 – 1.2 0.4 0.2 0.7 May
14.9 – 37.5 3.7 0.5 29.0 19.6 7.5 – 1.6 0.6 – 0.0 2.9 June
– 38.2 55.3 – 5.3 9.1 34.6 5.7 23.6 – 1.7 4.3 0.1 2.6 July
– 24.1 – 71.1 – 11.7 12.5 67.9 56.8 13.9 – 2.4 – 1.8 – 0.1 1.4 Aug.
4.7 – 1.1 3.3 0.3 – 13.6 – 56.8 45.1 – 5.3 – 2.6 0.1 6.0 Sep.
5.1 65.9 0.1 0.1 – 5.4 – 32.1 36.8 – 3.3 – 0.2 0.1 – 6.7 Oct.
22.6 13.6 – 0.0 – 0.3 17.3 12.6 4.3 – 5.5 3.2 0.0 2.7 Nov.
– 16.3 – 24.6 2.1 2.4 – 24.6 – 37.6 19.0 – 4.1 – 2.0 0.1 0.0 Dec.
– 42.9 147.9 2.3 – 5.1 – 0.2 – 37.1 38.4 – 6.5 – 0.1 – 0.2 5.4 2023 Jan.
12.9 50.9 1.1 – 0.7 0.4 – 33.2 32.6 – 8.0 1.3 – 0.1 7.8 Feb.
27.1 – 34.8 2.3 0.9 – 15.5 – 45.7 31.8 – 10.4 – 0.2 0.3 8.7 Mar.
– 39.0 86.7 1.9 0.7 6.3 – 11.7 25.3 – 10.2 0.7 0.2 1.9 Apr.
– 11.8 2.8 2.6 0.9 6.7 – 6.2 18.4 – 10.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 5.1 May
– 9.8 8.4 1.7 1.1 0.8 – 29.2 36.7 – 10.0 – 0.3 – 0.0 3.6 June
– 6.4 20.0 1.6 1.3 0.7 – 21.8 31.5 – 10.3 0.3 0.3 0.8 July
7.4 – 1.5 2.9 – 1.9 6.4 – 21.1 30.4 – 11.2 1.1 0.1 7.1 Aug.
– 11.6 – 12.1 3.6 – 1.7 – 5.7 – 13.3 17.8 – 8.6 – 1.0 0.1 – 0.7 Sep.
– 2.4 2.9 1.5 – 0.5 1.9 – 31.2 38.8 – 9.4 0.8 – 0.1 3.0 Oct.
– 9.5 15.0 1.1 – 0.4 11.2 9.5 11.7 – 10.5 1.1 0.1 – 0.6 Nov.
of paper issued by euro area MFIs.  9 Including national banknotes still in circulation.
10 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates should on no
account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are therefore not
comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.  11 Thedifference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank
and the amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the
Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
10•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
End of
monthTotal
assets or
liabilities Total Total LoansDebt
securities  2Shares and
other
equities Total LoansDebt
securities  3 
 
Claims
on non-
euro area
residentsOther
assets
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2021 Oct. 31,778.8 21,201.7 14,817.8 12,379.4 1,548.1 890.3 6,384.0 987.7 5,396.3 6,825.2 3,751.9
Nov. 32,193.4 21,381.5 14,911.5 12,478.0 1,542.5 891.0 6,470.1 985.8 5,484.2 6,917.4 3,894.5
Dec. 31,777.4 21,384.4 14,917.2 12,462.9 1,567.3 887.0 6,467.2 988.5 5,478.8 6,738.7 3,654.2
2022 Jan. 32,417.1 21,571.9 15,046.8 12,609.0 1,553.2 884.6 6,525.0 999.2 5,525.9 6,914.5 3,930.7
Feb. 32,601.8 21,629.0 15,075.6 12,645.3 1,553.7 876.6 6,553.4 991.8 5,561.6 7,011.4 3,961.5
Mar. 32,937.3 21,737.1 15,176.1 12,722.0 1,587.4 866.7 6,561.1 1,001.4 5,559.7 6,996.1 4,204.1
Apr. 33,570.1 21,764.2 15,254.0 12,805.3 1,597.6 851.1 6,510.1 1,011.3 5,498.8 7,063.0 4,742.9
May 33,482.5 21,816.2 15,304.5 12,878.2 1,568.2 858.1 6,511.7 1,003.9 5,507.8 7,013.2 4,653.1
June 33,886.1 21,886.0 15,373.6 12,973.4 1,569.1 831.1 6,512.4 1,003.0 5,509.4 7,064.5 4,935.5
July 33,877.7 21,984.6 15,451.5 13,043.7 1,578.6 829.2 6,533.1 1,003.0 5,530.1 7,216.9 4,676.2
Aug. 34,342.9 21,872.4 15,459.5 13,080.1 1,553.7 825.7 6,413.0 996.9 5,416.1 7,301.6 5,168.9
Sep. 34,619.1 21,901.4 15,558.0 13,191.3 1,544.9 821.7 6,343.4 998.1 5,345.2 7,241.7 5,476.0
Oct. 34,551.1 21,891.6 15,553.1 13,190.6 1,533.0 829.6 6,338.5 995.2 5,343.3 7,336.9 5,322.6
Nov. 34,226.4 22,012.4 15,628.2 13,228.7 1,559.1 840.4 6,384.2 990.2 5,394.1 7,207.7 5,006.2
Dec. 33,866.4 21,792.5 15,515.4 13,124.3 1,555.4 835.7 6,277.1 998.9 5,278.2 6,873.4 5,200.5
2023 Jan. 33,828.2 21,883.3 15,553.1 13,171.7 1,545.6 835.8 6,330.2 1,000.3 5,330.0 6,982.9 4,962.0
Feb. 34,114.7 21,860.3 15,543.2 13,157.7 1,540.9 844.6 6,317.1 991.3 5,325.9 7,003.0 5,251.4
Mar. 33,955.0 21,921.0 15,575.3 13,175.7 1,552.2 847.4 6,345.7 995.3 5,350.3 7,101.4 4,932.6
Apr. 33,942.9 21,906.2 15,598.6 13,166.2 1,566.3 866.2 6,307.6 991.1 5,316.5 7,040.8 4,995.9
May 34,134.7 21,917.1 15,648.8 13,183.8 1,595.6 869.4 6,268.4 995.4 5,272.9 7,152.5 5,065.1
June 34,046.4 21,910.7 15,632.8 13,177.9 1,584.4 870.4 6,277.9 988.5 5,289.4 7,070.1 5,065.6
July 34,180.0 21,860.1 15,636.3 13,174.7 1,586.5 875.1 6,223.8 988.2 5,235.6 7,155.1 5,164.8
Aug. 34,233.1 21,805.6 15,568.6 13,119.1 1,576.8 872.8 6,237.0 986.1 5,250.9 7,253.3 5,174.2
Sep. 34,373.6 21,789.2 15,595.2 13,149.8 1,574.6 870.9 6,194.0 987.3 5,206.7 7,197.3 5,387.1
Oct. 34,338.7 21,745.7 15,591.2 13,160.3 1,554.9 876.0 6,154.6 984.1 5,170.5 7,266.5 5,326.5
Nov. 34,130.9 21,853.6 15,675.7 13,221.3 1,573.4 881.0 6,178.0 980.8 5,197.2 7,240.9 5,036.4
German contribution (€ billion)
2021 Oct. 7,461.0 5,147.0 3,874.5 3,363.5 228.6 282.4 1,272.5 284.4 988.0 1,385.2 928.8
Nov. 7,575.0 5,210.7 3,904.2 3,389.9 229.0 285.3 1,306.4 280.7 1,025.7 1,396.4 967.9
Dec. 7,475.8 5,212.1 3,914.7 3,393.2 237.0 284.5 1,297.4 278.0 1,019.5 1,355.9 907.8
2022 Jan. 7,787.0 5,243.9 3,944.7 3,422.9 235.8 286.0 1,299.2 279.9 1,019.3 1,433.6 1,109.5
Feb. 7,871.3 5,262.9 3,968.5 3,445.2 238.0 285.3 1,294.3 277.8 1,016.5 1,464.4 1,144.0
Mar. 7,997.7 5,280.7 3,990.2 3,464.4 240.6 285.2 1,290.6 278.6 1,012.0 1,447.5 1,269.5
Apr. 8,259.4 5,278.9 4,008.0 3,481.9 240.1 286.1 1,270.9 283.2 987.7 1,464.0 1,516.5
May 8,228.4 5,304.5 4,034.5 3,506.0 240.8 287.7 1,270.0 280.3 989.7 1,445.0 1,479.0
June 8,413.5 5,322.6 4,058.9 3,537.6 237.8 283.5 1,263.7 282.5 981.2 1,466.1 1,624.8
July 8,287.9 5,375.0 4,096.1 3,560.3 252.7 283.2 1,278.8 283.6 995.2 1,481.5 1,431.4
Aug. 8,546.0 5,364.5 4,132.0 3,600.0 249.1 282.9 1,232.5 281.5 951.0 1,492.4 1,689.0
Sep. 8,857.6 5,356.3 4,153.9 3,624.8 246.1 283.0 1,202.4 284.3 918.1 1,502.4 1,998.8
Oct. 8,826.7 5,366.0 4,163.6 3,634.6 245.9 283.1 1,202.4 284.8 917.5 1,509.0 1,951.8
Nov. 8,653.9 5,402.0 4,189.2 3,656.3 249.8 283.1 1,212.8 283.4 929.4 1,502.4 1,749.6
Dec. 8,626.1 5,345.2 4,165.8 3,636.7 245.9 283.2 1,179.4 283.2 896.1 1,417.3 1,863.7
2023 Jan. 8,561.4 5,377.1 4,178.3 3,652.7 245.9 279.7 1,198.8 285.0 913.9 1,443.8 1,740.5
Feb. 8,712.0 5,371.7 4,186.6 3,662.2 243.6 280.9 1,185.1 284.0 901.1 1,443.9 1,896.4
Mar. 8,573.5 5,388.1 4,193.6 3,661.9 252.1 279.6 1,194.5 284.2 910.3 1,457.2 1,728.2
Apr. 8,559.3 5,383.7 4,206.2 3,672.7 252.4 281.1 1,177.5 287.7 889.8 1,435.7 1,739.8
May 8,614.3 5,389.9 4,217.4 3,685.4 252.1 279.9 1,172.6 286.1 886.4 1,468.3 1,756.1
June 8,647.9 5,387.4 4,215.9 3,679.0 255.5 281.4 1,171.5 284.2 887.4 1,433.5 1,826.9
July 8,779.6 5,390.2 4,222.0 3,685.7 255.6 280.6 1,168.3 287.2 881.1 1,439.0 1,950.5
Aug. 8,776.6 5,383.7 4,215.6 3,685.5 249.4 280.6 1,168.1 285.0 883.0 1,442.2 1,950.7
Sep. 8,834.2 5,362.1 4,216.4 3,686.3 248.5 281.5 1,145.8 288.4 857.4 1,446.5 2,025.5
Oct. 8,844.5 5,360.6 4,215.5 3,685.5 247.9 282.1 1,145.1 291.6 853.5 1,461.4 2,022.6
Nov. 8,651.3 5,385.6 4,227.8 3,697.1 248.5 282.3 1,157.8 289.7 868.1 1,436.7 1,829.1
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national
central banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Including money market paper ofenterprises.  3 Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by general
government.  4 Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p.12●). Excluding
MFIs` cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
11•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed
maturities ofAt agreed
notice of  6
Currency
in
circulation  4 Totalof which:
in euro  5 Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 monthsEnd of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
1,450.3 15,542.2 14,177.1 14,350.0 9,205.6 707.1 148.0 1,795.5 2,458.8 34.9 2021 Oct.
1,456.3 15,548.8 14,218.9 14,375.7 9,255.0 697.0 143.3 1,786.3 2,459.8 34.3 Nov.
1,477.0 15,617.2 14,347.7 14,502.1 9,363.7 704.9 131.3 1,805.2 2,463.5 33.6 Dec.
1,477.9 15,694.2 14,327.3 14,526.9 9,353.8 706.6 135.3 1,820.2 2,479.3 31.8 2022 Jan.
1,487.0 15,787.1 14,373.0 14,561.7 9,412.4 688.4 134.3 1,807.7 2,487.3 31.6 Feb.
1,509.6 15,891.2 14,465.7 14,650.6 9,490.5 703.7 123.5 1,809.6 2,492.1 31.2 Mar.
1,520.7 15,934.3 14,521.8 14,712.1 9,555.8 705.4 123.5 1,802.0 2,494.3 31.0 Apr.
1,528.5 15,950.4 14,568.7 14,740.8 9,597.9 684.9 120.2 1,803.2 2,506.6 27.9 May
1,535.1 16,100.5 14,633.1 14,810.3 9,643.8 704.8 123.4 1,800.3 2,510.4 27.5 June
1,543.7 16,184.3 14,738.3 14,937.4 9,735.4 741.0 127.1 1,791.0 2,515.8 27.1 July
1,539.1 16,161.9 14,793.1 14,985.4 9,754.1 781.5 125.9 1,770.0 2,526.0 28.0 Aug.
1,537.7 16,199.4 14,785.2 15,036.4 9,688.0 913.3 125.5 1,756.3 2,525.7 27.6 Sep.
1,537.2 16,095.8 14,708.2 14,936.7 9,507.4 993.0 130.3 1,741.7 2,522.3 42.1 Oct.
1,533.7 16,084.9 14,722.7 14,917.6 9,442.3 1,042.9 134.6 1,741.1 2,514.5 42.3 Nov.
1,545.3 15,997.0 14,765.9 14,929.5 9,374.2 1,099.5 133.9 1,749.5 2,530.0 42.4 Dec.
1,533.4 15,876.9 14,667.4 14,844.9 9,208.5 1,163.7 146.1 1,746.4 2,532.0 48.2 2023 Jan.
1,529.9 15,843.6 14,624.9 14,773.2 9,064.0 1,223.7 157.3 1,746.5 2,531.8 49.9 Feb.
1,533.8 15,891.6 14,649.1 14,788.3 8,969.5 1,311.8 174.0 1,756.9 2,524.8 51.4 Mar.
1,537.9 15,848.9 14,649.2 14,784.7 8,918.3 1,346.2 187.9 1,765.7 2,513.9 52.8 Apr.
1,539.7 15,718.1 14,616.6 14,756.8 8,834.7 1,387.5 200.1 1,768.2 2,511.0 55.2 May
1,542.7 15,760.5 14,648.9 14,755.8 8,755.6 1,455.9 218.2 1,768.4 2,499.8 57.9 June
1,545.9 15,696.0 14,619.2 14,725.4 8,662.9 1,512.3 231.6 1,768.5 2,489.2 60.9 July
1,538.2 15,646.9 14,595.1 14,694.0 8,578.0 1,579.2 240.8 1,765.9 2,465.1 65.0 Aug.
1,535.1 15,756.4 14,654.5 14,766.9 8,569.2 1,647.6 255.2 1,783.1 2,441.7 70.1 Sep.
1,531.0 15,635.6 14,575.5 14,701.2 8,421.0 1,735.9 275.5 1,773.3 2,420.5 74.9 Oct.
1,528.2 15,633.3 14,629.9 14,744.1 8,429.0 1,775.3 285.9 1,765.3 2,408.0 80.6 Nov.
German contribution (€ billion)
331.4 4,354.3 4,080.9 3,950.3 2,681.4 143.0 31.1 534.8 535.5 24.6 2021 Oct.
332.6 4,390.5 4,107.1 3,968.0 2,710.9 132.5 30.3 534.6 535.5 24.3 Nov.
337.1 4,425.2 4,113.0 3,968.5 2,691.5 141.2 30.1 544.6 537.0 24.1 Dec.
337.9 4,418.1 4,139.2 4,006.8 2,737.3 135.4 29.7 543.6 537.4 23.4 2022 Jan.
340.1 4,444.1 4,161.0 4,017.1 2,752.3 132.4 29.4 542.3 537.7 23.1 Feb.
344.3 4,441.6 4,159.0 4,014.6 2,755.3 130.7 29.3 540.4 536.0 22.9 Mar.
346.7 4,445.6 4,158.1 4,019.8 2,754.8 140.0 29.4 537.7 535.1 22.7 Apr.
349.4 4,478.3 4,170.7 4,016.7 2,769.9 125.8 29.7 534.8 533.9 22.6 May
349.9 4,517.1 4,194.6 4,031.6 2,787.1 127.8 30.1 531.9 532.3 22.4 June
359.0 4,507.6 4,222.4 4,070.3 2,813.6 142.1 31.0 530.6 530.6 22.3 July
371.5 4,552.6 4,289.4 4,135.2 2,870.1 153.3 30.6 530.7 528.3 22.2 Aug.
371.8 4,541.5 4,267.4 4,135.1 2,834.9 193.7 30.9 530.3 523.0 22.2 Sep.
371.8 4,546.8 4,270.2 4,140.4 2,804.0 233.2 31.6 529.3 519.8 22.4 Oct.
371.5 4,578.7 4,283.7 4,146.3 2,806.0 240.1 32.1 531.0 514.4 22.6 Nov.
374.0 4,534.2 4,260.8 4,119.2 2,764.3 260.2 34.1 527.1 510.4 23.0 Dec.
368.9 4,489.3 4,257.7 4,126.0 2,749.9 286.6 36.9 529.6 499.1 24.0 2023 Jan.
368.1 4,496.6 4,250.9 4,106.5 2,706.5 314.2 39.1 530.3 491.2 25.2 Feb.
369.0 4,505.7 4,236.8 4,090.4 2,667.4 336.4 42.4 536.3 481.0 26.8 Mar.
369.8 4,473.0 4,248.0 4,104.2 2,660.3 360.2 46.1 538.3 471.0 28.3 Apr.
370.7 4,469.7 4,256.0 4,103.8 2,647.5 373.8 50.3 540.9 460.8 30.5 May
371.7 4,460.3 4,259.3 4,096.2 2,616.5 400.5 54.1 541.0 450.9 33.2 June
373.1 4,455.4 4,259.2 4,106.1 2,603.8 426.9 57.6 540.8 440.7 36.2 July
371.2 4,460.4 4,259.8 4,101.7 2,577.8 455.8 61.5 538.1 429.6 38.9 Aug.
369.4 4,448.9 4,258.5 4,104.2 2,568.6 468.0 66.2 538.5 421.1 41.8 Sep.
369.0 4,447.4 4,259.3 4,129.3 2,553.2 507.9 73.1 538.5 411.7 44.8 Oct.
368.6 4,454.2 4,280.9 4,149.1 2,561.8 516.0 79.4 542.5 401.2 48.3 Nov.
euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by theBundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item "Intra-Eurosystem
liability/claim related to banknote issue" (see "Other liability items").  5 Excluding central
governments' deposits.  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
12•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) * (cont'd)
Liabilities (cont'd)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont'd)
General government 
 
Debt securities 
Other general governmentRepo transactions
with non-banks
in the euro area
 
With agreed maturities of 
At agreed notice of  2
End of
monthCentral
govern-
ment Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 months Totalof which:
Enterprises
and
householdsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  3 Totalof which:
Denom-
inated
in euro
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2021 Oct. 740.3 451.9 323.3 48.1 18.0 41.6 17.7 3.3 272.2 272.2 630.3 2,040.1 1,356.4
Nov. 691.5 481.6 349.8 50.3 19.1 41.7 17.5 3.3 267.7 267.6 654.8 2,046.7 1,355.2
Dec. 646.7 468.4 337.4 49.7 19.4 41.1 17.6 3.2 234.3 233.1 647.5 2,019.7 1,346.8
2022 Jan. 711.0 456.2 306.6 67.4 19.6 41.2 17.6 3.8 291.8 291.6 621.2 2,049.2 1,351.4
Feb. 755.6 469.9 314.1 73.5 19.8 41.3 17.6 3.7 301.3 301.1 584.0 2,044.8 1,358.7
Mar. 769.7 470.9 304.7 82.5 20.5 42.4 17.3 3.4 283.8 283.6 583.8 2,026.7 1,358.6
Apr. 747.7 474.5 306.7 83.4 21.2 42.6 17.2 3.4 310.1 309.9 604.0 2,073.8 1,362.8
May 718.8 490.8 316.7 88.4 22.3 43.3 16.8 3.3 313.0 312.9 593.9 2,038.0 1,337.7
June 788.4 501.8 325.2 90.9 22.9 43.3 16.2 3.2 281.2 281.1 592.9 2,069.3 1,361.0
July 757.2 489.8 302.8 100.4 24.2 42.9 16.2 3.3 306.0 305.9 590.8 2,090.9 1,361.1
Aug. 676.9 499.6 309.1 104.6 24.0 42.5 16.1 3.2 283.8 283.7 597.5 2,113.5 1,375.1
Sep. 684.3 478.8 281.7 111.2 24.5 42.3 16.0 3.2 264.8 264.7 589.1 2,153.5 1,415.1
Oct. 678.9 480.2 287.2 109.2 24.3 41.5 14.7 3.2 268.8 268.8 625.8 2,130.5 1,416.5
Nov. 668.8 498.6 306.2 109.2 25.1 40.8 14.2 3.2 295.4 295.4 648.0 2,159.0 1,441.3
Dec. 584.0 483.5 296.0 103.6 27.2 40.2 13.5 3.0 248.3 248.3 650.9 2,166.2 1,474.6
2023 Jan. 551.2 480.7 283.1 113.0 27.5 40.6 12.8 3.7 284.0 284.0 657.6 2,204.8 1,510.2
Feb. 572.0 498.4 297.4 115.1 28.7 40.3 13.2 3.7 281.6 281.5 651.2 2,259.2 1,531.4
Mar. 602.7 500.6 288.4 125.7 28.4 39.6 14.7 3.7 255.3 255.2 671.9 2,257.0 1,551.1
Apr. 576.2 488.0 277.7 123.3 29.7 39.4 14.2 3.7 261.7 261.3 683.3 2,253.1 1,561.0
May 471.6 489.8 277.0 126.7 29.3 39.4 13.8 3.6 291.9 287.8 684.8 2,298.9 1,589.8
June 496.1 508.6 287.8 134.7 29.4 39.3 13.8 3.6 280.4 280.3 678.8 2,312.9 1,600.3
July 466.6 504.0 281.1 137.7 28.4 39.4 13.9 3.6 284.1 283.4 689.4 2,400.7 1,646.0
Aug. 446.4 506.5 282.9 138.6 28.0 39.6 13.8 3.5 288.9 288.9 698.0 2,420.1 1,656.1
Sep. 481.6 507.9 285.0 136.7 29.3 39.7 13.8 3.4 281.7 281.7 697.3 2,442.8 1,668.6
Oct. 453.0 481.5 266.4 131.0 28.5 39.2 13.1 3.3 306.8 306.6 716.7 2,504.2 1,704.7
Nov. 404.7 484.4 274.7 127.5 27.2 38.9 13.0 3.2 328.5 328.4 733.5 2,516.5 1,723.8
German contribution (€ billion)
2021 Oct. 171.3 232.7 142.7 40.9 14.8 31.8 2.3 0.2 10.8 10.8 2.1 547.9 316.4
Nov. 178.4 244.1 155.2 38.8 16.1 31.6 2.2 0.2 6.1 6.1 1.8 556.5 324.8
Dec. 206.2 250.5 161.9 39.1 16.4 30.7 2.3 0.2 5.8 4.8 2.1 547.6 316.3
2022 Jan. 168.1 243.3 139.1 54.6 16.5 30.7 2.2 0.2 4.7 4.7 2.2 562.8 325.1
Feb. 170.6 256.3 147.8 59.2 16.3 30.6 2.2 0.2 5.8 5.8 2.3 572.5 338.8
Mar. 170.6 256.4 137.6 68.8 17.0 30.7 2.2 0.1 6.3 6.3 2.4 581.5 354.8
Apr. 167.6 258.2 137.6 70.0 17.6 30.6 2.2 0.2 4.4 4.4 2.2 596.5 357.3
May 190.1 271.4 144.2 75.3 18.5 31.1 2.2 0.2 4.8 4.8 2.4 596.8 359.0
June 205.0 280.5 147.7 80.5 19.0 31.0 2.2 0.1 5.4 5.4 2.3 604.2 362.6
July 166.8 270.4 128.3 89.0 20.2 30.6 2.2 0.1 9.8 9.8 2.4 613.8 369.1
Aug. 142.7 274.6 129.4 92.2 20.4 30.4 2.2 0.1 8.0 8.0 2.3 625.7 384.5
Sep. 147.4 259.1 109.0 96.6 20.8 30.3 2.2 0.1 5.4 5.4 2.4 640.0 395.3
Oct. 152.5 253.9 108.1 93.1 20.5 30.1 2.1 0.1 5.2 5.2 2.5 633.9 398.1
Nov. 175.5 256.9 114.7 88.9 21.5 29.8 1.9 0.1 8.3 8.3 2.5 634.2 402.6
Dec. 159.2 255.8 117.3 83.2 23.9 29.6 1.8 0.1 6.3 6.3 2.6 631.2 409.3
2023 Jan. 116.4 246.9 99.4 92.2 23.8 29.8 1.6 0.1 6.1 6.1 2.4 639.6 417.9
Feb. 129.3 260.8 110.3 94.6 24.6 29.7 1.5 0.1 7.5 7.5 2.3 651.5 427.1
Mar. 156.4 258.8 102.2 101.4 24.1 29.6 1.4 0.1 7.2 7.2 2.6 658.0 440.3
Apr. 117.4 251.4 97.3 97.8 25.4 29.5 1.3 0.1 7.9 7.9 2.7 654.9 446.8
May 105.6 260.2 104.8 99.5 25.0 29.7 1.2 0.1 7.7 7.7 2.6 670.6 458.1
June 95.9 268.2 106.1 106.5 24.9 29.5 1.1 0.1 7.3 7.3 2.6 671.6 452.8
July 89.5 259.9 96.6 109.1 23.7 29.5 0.9 0.1 7.6 7.6 2.9 679.9 457.6
Aug. 96.8 261.9 100.9 107.1 23.3 29.6 0.9 0.1 8.7 8.7 3.0 688.8 469.0
Sep. 85.2 259.5 97.5 107.0 24.5 29.6 0.8 0.1 7.8 7.8 3.0 705.6 470.0
Oct. 82.8 235.3 81.6 99.3 24.1 29.4 0.7 0.1 8.5 8.5 2.9 713.0 476.3
Nov. 73.3 231.8 81.2 97.7 22.7 29.2 0.7 0.1 9.6 9.6 3.0 706.3 470.9
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national central
banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 In Germany, only savings deposits.
3 Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding German MFIs'
portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area.  4 In Germany, bank debt
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper.5 Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued.  6 After deduction of inter-MFI
participations.  7 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.
8 Including DEM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on p. 10●). 9 For
the German contribution, the difference between the volume of euro banknotes

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
13•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  Memo item:
Other liability items  
 
issued (net)  3Monetary aggregates  7
(from 2002 German contribution
excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
up to
1 year  4over
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsLiabilities
to non-
euro area
residents  5Capital
and
reserves  6Excess
of
inter-MFI
liabilities Total  8of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem-
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12Monetary
capital
forma-
tion  13Monetary
liabilities
of central
govern-
ments
(Post
Office,
Treasury)  14 End of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
23.0 17.6 1,999.5 5,409.6 2,999.7 – 49.4 3,483.7 0.0 11,143.6 14,565.3 15,366.7 6,874.5 188.4 2021 Oct.
19.3 17.8 2,009.6 5,499.4 3,037.4 1.1 3,681.3 0.0 11,227.0 14,638.0 15,451.9 6,912.5 189.9 Nov.
12.3 18.0 1,989.3 5,370.5 3,026.8 12.7 3,371.8 0.0 11,347.0 14,759.7 15,543.3 6,899.2 195.2 Dec.
22.0 18.5 2,008.7 5,541.7 3,001.7 22.9 3,716.5 0.0 11,310.9 14,760.3 15,545.3 6,907.4 196.2 2022 Jan.
33.4 5.7 2,005.7 5,629.5 2,994.0 16.8 3,757.2 0.0 11,387.0 14,829.6 15,584.6 6,883.9 195.2 Feb.
30.7 6.2 1,989.8 5,610.2 3,003.0 38.0 3,991.1 0.0 11,476.5 14,939.8 15,683.6 6,879.4 195.4 Mar.
39.0 16.2 2,018.6 5,747.7 2,979.2 – 2.7 4,402.9 0.0 11,556.7 15,025.8 15,810.5 6,876.8 197.5 Apr.
34.0 15.6 1,988.4 5,795.3 2,915.9 15.6 4,332.0 0.0 11,618.5 15,081.7 15,855.7 6,782.0 199.3 May
47.8 14.4 2,007.0 5,719.3 2,905.2 25.9 4,656.7 0.0 11,679.3 15,172.5 15,942.3 6,786.6 199.6 June
15.1 16.4 2,059.5 5,862.8 2,970.9 7.7 4,320.5 0.0 11,762.1 15,310.8 16,065.7 6,894.6 204.2 July
16.7 19.0 2,077.8 5,914.8 2,890.5 33.9 4,808.0 0.0 11,775.7 15,377.4 16,137.0 6,812.0 197.0 Aug.
34.9 19.5 2,099.1 5,898.7 2,845.0 16.1 5,114.8 0.0 11,681.3 15,419.6 16,179.9 6,773.5 196.2 Sep.
3.8 24.0 2,102.8 6,038.5 2,819.3 38.9 4,996.2 0.0 11,505.4 15,322.1 16,100.0 6,750.6 196.4 Oct.
23.7 22.8 2,112.5 5,881.3 2,857.3 66.8 4,700.0 0.0 11,460.1 15,322.7 16,151.4 6,797.1 200.1 Nov.
31.7 23.2 2,111.2 5,553.5 2,818.0 57.2 4,830.0 0.0 11,382.0 15,315.7 16,132.1 6,764.5 192.7 Dec.
17.6 27.8 2,159.4 5,636.6 2,861.7 84.9 4,688.2 0.0 11,195.3 15,211.7 16,043.2 6,860.0 191.6 2023 Jan.
47.0 30.4 2,181.8 5,670.8 2,810.8 81.4 4,986.3 0.0 11,062.4 15,153.3 16,008.8 6,832.9 192.2 Feb.
54.0 30.4 2,172.6 5,657.4 2,893.2 89.4 4,705.3 0.0 10,951.2 15,153.6 16,012.9 6,917.5 182.5 Mar.
50.2 32.9 2,170.0 5,633.4 2,885.5 114.2 4,725.0 0.0 10,893.7 15,131.8 16,006.6 6,917.1 182.9 Apr.
56.0 32.8 2,210.1 5,722.1 2,908.3 158.6 4,812.4 0.0 10,806.8 15,098.3 15,989.8 6,984.7 178.5 May
49.9 33.1 2,229.9 5,584.3 2,885.6 149.6 4,851.5 0.0 10,741.4 15,115.9 15,989.5 6,984.8 178.0 June
47.1 34.2 2,319.3 5,595.4 2,907.5 102.4 4,958.5 0.0 10,647.7 15,083.3 15,984.4 7,099.3 180.5 July
50.8 33.5 2,335.8 5,655.8 2,926.1 121.3 4,938.0 0.0 10,553.4 15,041.6 15,946.7 7,136.0 176.9 Aug.
45.1 36.4 2,361.3 5,541.0 2,886.8 111.5 5,120.8 0.0 10,546.8 15,093.8 16,000.6 7,144.5 180.3 Sep.
56.6 36.6 2,411.0 5,511.0 2,920.5 117.9 5,095.0 0.0 10,375.5 15,002.4 15,956.0 7,222.2 179.6 Oct.
45.8 36.1 2,434.5 5,451.9 2,939.7 159.3 4,840.3 0.0 10,393.0 15,052.1 16,025.6 7,262.2 183.4 Nov.
German contribution (€ billion)
13.3 7.2 527.5 1,165.8 783.9 –1,110.5 1,706.6 500.8 2,824.1 3,591.6 3,625.0 1,902.8 0.0 2021 Oct.
14.5 7.4 534.6 1,227.7 803.0 –1,154.8 1,744.2 504.5 2,866.1 3,621.4 3,651.2 1,928.3 0.0 Nov.
16.1 7.5 524.0 1,305.6 796.1 –1,297.0 1,690.3 509.8 2,853.4 3,619.4 3,651.0 1,919.7 0.0 Dec.
13.6 7.7 541.5 1,271.1 778.4 –1,169.6 1,919.3 511.1 2,876.4 3,652.3 3,680.4 1,917.7 0.0 2022 Jan.
14.7 7.5 550.4 1,275.8 774.8 –1,172.9 1,969.0 514.2 2,900.0 3,677.2 3,707.4 1,921.4 0.0 Feb.
14.8 7.3 559.5 1,299.3 781.2 –1,190.8 2,076.2 520.0 2,892.9 3,677.0 3,707.8 1,934.7 0.0 Mar.
14.6 7.1 574.8 1,284.0 769.2 –1,168.1 2,325.6 523.3 2,892.4 3,686.8 3,715.1 1,935.2 0.0 Apr.
14.9 7.3 574.6 1,307.0 748.6 –1,199.2 2,289.8 526.8 2,914.0 3,699.5 3,728.9 1,911.8 0.0 May
18.7 6.6 578.9 1,317.0 743.1 –1,255.4 2,479.8 530.5 2,934.8 3,726.6 3,759.7 1,907.5 0.0 June
21.2 6.8 585.8 1,287.5 779.7 –1,189.6 2,276.7 525.2 2,941.9 3,757.1 3,797.3 1,949.2 0.0 July
21.8 7.6 596.2 1,349.3 739.6 –1,271.6 2,540.1 513.5 2,999.5 3,826.5 3,866.3 1,919.1 0.0 Aug.
27.5 8.1 604.3 1,385.2 711.9 –1,287.1 2,858.3 516.8 2,944.0 3,811.2 3,854.6 1,899.2 0.0 Sep.
19.1 9.7 605.0 1,355.1 693.8 –1,215.2 2,804.7 516.8 2,912.1 3,812.3 3,848.8 1,880.8 0.0 Oct.
20.8 11.2 602.2 1,310.2 714.6 –1,191.2 2,596.7 516.8 2,920.8 3,819.7 3,862.5 1,900.3 0.0 Nov.
20.2 11.7 599.3 1,265.7 690.1 –1,230.4 2,726.5 518.9 2,881.6 3,795.1 3,835.9 1,869.2 0.0 Dec.
24.0 13.1 602.4 1,226.5 689.1 –1,117.5 2,625.9 521.2 2,849.3 3,789.5 3,835.2 1,874.9 0.0 2023 Jan.
29.3 15.8 606.4 1,171.8 668.4 –1,073.2 2,787.2 522.2 2,816.8 3,782.0 3,836.8 1,860.1 0.0 Feb.
36.2 17.5 604.3 1,188.0 700.6 –1,129.7 2,641.2 524.5 2,769.6 3,756.4 3,819.8 1,897.7 0.0 Mar.
37.0 18.5 599.4 1,107.1 704.2 –1,028.5 2,637.8 526.4 2,757.6 3,759.4 3,825.5 1,899.8 0.0 Apr.
41.2 19.5 609.9 1,122.5 715.6 –1,036.9 2,662.4 529.0 2,752.3 3,762.8 3,833.9 1,926.7 0.0 May
44.6 19.2 607.9 1,099.9 709.8 –1,026.8 2,723.1 530.7 2,722.6 3,760.6 3,834.2 1,921.6 0.0 June
44.5 19.9 615.4 1,070.7 724.0 –996.4 2,835.7 532.2 2,700.4 3,759.3 3,834.2 1,946.1 0.0 July
51.0 20.6 617.2 1,044.4 734.2 –998.8 2,835.9 535.1 2,678.7 3,756.9 3,840.1 1,958.1 0.0 Aug.
48.5 22.6 634.5 1,048.4 722.8 –1,000.9 2,898.6 538.7 2,666.2 3,753.7 3,835.5 1,967.4 0.0 Sep.
49.7 24.4 639.0 1,035.9 735.9 –998.0 2,898.7 540.2 2,634.8 3,751.7 3,837.2 1,987.9 0.0 Oct.
49.5 23.8 633.1 1,012.4 742.8 –983.0 2,705.8 541.3 2,643.0 3,760.8 3,846.6 1,996.0 0.0 Nov.
actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2).  10 Overnight deposits (excluding central governments'
deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central governments'
overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the consolidated balance
sheet.  11 M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to two years and at agreednotice of up to three months (excluding central governments' deposits) and (for the
euro area) central governments' monetary liabilities with such maturities.  12 M2 plus
repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt securities
up to two years.  13 Deposits with agreed maturities of over two years and at agreed
notice of over three months, debt securities with maturities of over two years, capital
and reserves.  14 Non-existent in Germany.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
14•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
3. Banking systems liquidity position *
Stocks
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8
Eurosystem 2
2021 Dec. 839.2 0.2 2,208.8 0.0 4,655.6 745.0 0.0 1,521.4 628.3 965.7 3,843.3 6,109.7
2022 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 877.7 0.3 2,201.5 0.0 4,750.2 734.2 0.0 1,540.6 582.0 1,160.5 3,812.3 6,087.1
Mar. 887.2 0.3 2,201.3 0.0 4,842.0 746.0 0.0 1,550.6 642.6 1,091.1 3,900.8 6,197.3
Apr. 913.2 0.4 2,199.8 0.0 4,889.2 714.9 0.0 1,575.9 667.8 1,116.7 3,927.3 6,218.1
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 934.2 0.5 2,198.8 0.0 4,939.1 681.3 0.0 1,591.5 624.1 1,129.1 4,046.1 6,319.0
July 943.7 1.0 2,149.4 0.0 4,958.8 678.7 0.0 1,604.0 667.6 1,158.0 3,943.3 6,226.0
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 950.1 1.7 2,124.9 0.0 4,954.8 707.0 0.0 1,585.3 553.9 1,249.2 3,936.1 6,228.5
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 955.8 4.0 2,118.8 0.0 4,948.3 4,490.0 0.0 1,563.7 536.7 1,104.4 332.0 6,385.7
Dec. 960.4 1.9 1,947.1 0.0 4,946.1 4,521.5 0.0 1,560.8 492.5 1,066.9 213.8 6,296.2
2023 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 940.4 1.2 1,303.3 0.1 4,942.1 4,051.6 0.0 1,565.6 372.8 1,001.6 195.6 5,812.7
Mar. 916.8 0.9 1,233.3 0.0 4,939.0 4,103.0 0.0 1,553.9 380.2 861.8 191.1 5,848.0
Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 945.0 1.4 1,117.7 0.1 4,905.6 3,996.1 0.0 1,559.8 360.6 870.5 182.7 5,738.6
June 948.2 1.6 1,100.5 0.1 4,884.1 4,126.4 0.0 1,563.7 256.4 806.6 181.6 5,871.7
July . . . . . . . . . . . .
Aug. 927.8 10.9 682.0 0.1 4,853.0 3,704.4 0.0 1,567.0 254.4 770.5 177.4 5,448.9
Sep. 924.3 5.6 601.0 0.1 4,811.2 3,647.4 0.0 1,564.2 222.5 733.8 174.3 5,386.0
Oct. 931.2 8.1 515.4 0.1 4,767.9 3,577.4 0.0 1,554.7 222.7 693.3 174.6 5,306.7
Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec. 933.3 7.3 495.9 0.0 4,715.0 3,548.8 0.0 1,551.1 194.1 685.3 172.0 5,271.9
Deutsche Bundesbank
2021 Dec. 201.3 0.0 440.3 0.0 1,015.8 206.4 0.0 370.9 220.4 – 219.4 1,077.1 1,654.4
2022 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 212.4 0.3 421.7 0.0 1,034.0 204.5 0.0 374.6 205.6 – 165.1 1,048.8 1,627.9
Mar. 215.6 0.1 421.7 0.0 1,057.9 211.8 0.0 378.1 191.1 – 193.7 1,108.0 1,698.0
Apr. 223.9 0.1 420.8 0.0 1,068.7 197.7 0.0 384.9 196.7 – 189.1 1,123.3 1,705.9
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 230.4 0.1 420.2 0.0 1,087.4 189.9 0.0 388.0 196.9 – 183.1 1,147.4 1,725.3
July 231.7 0.3 409.1 0.0 1,084.3 185.8 0.0 390.3 214.9 – 175.4 1,109.7 1,685.8
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 232.1 0.3 403.6 0.0 1,076.8 228.5 0.0 379.5 157.9 – 161.8 1,108.8 1,716.8
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 231.7 0.8 400.5 0.0 1,071.5 1,304.0 0.0 379.0 127.2 – 231.4 125.9 1,808.8
Dec. 232.4 0.5 352.5 0.0 1,079.2 1,346.6 0.0 378.8 121.0 – 242.4 60.5 1,785.9
2023 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 229.8 0.4 231.9 0.1 1,076.8 1,234.6 0.0 377.2 77.8 – 205.4 54.8 1,666.7
Mar. 228.9 0.4 212.8 0.0 1,077.0 1,263.7 0.0 374.5 69.2 – 242.5 54.2 1,692.4
Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 239.2 0.7 200.2 0.1 1,066.1 1,228.0 0.0 375.7 73.4 – 221.1 50.1 1,653.9
June 241.7 0.7 198.9 0.1 1,056.8 1,256.3 0.0 377.2 54.7 – 241.8 52.0 1,685.4
July . . . . . . . . . . . .
Aug. 236.2 1.5 142.4 0.1 1,048.8 1,175.5 0.0 377.5 49.9 – 222.5 48.4 1,601.5
Sep. 234.5 0.8 131.2 0.1 1,041.3 1,177.8 0.0 377.3 40.1 – 235.4 48.0 1,603.1
Oct. 235.7 1.3 96.3 0.0 1,024.0 1,151.1 0.0 374.9 28.7 – 245.4 47.9 1,574.0
Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec. 236.8 0.7 89.2 0.0 1,016.7 1,171.3 0.0 373.5 18.9 – 267.7 47.3 1,592.1
Discrepancies may arise from rounding.  * The banking system's liquidity position is
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro area credit institutions with the
Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of the
Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  1 Figures are daily averages
for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following the
changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No figuresare available in such cases.  2 Source: ECB.  3 Includes liquidity provided under the
Eurosystem's asset purchase programmes.  4 From August 2009 includes liquidity
absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem's foreign exchange swap operations.  5 From
2002 euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national cen-
tral banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In accordance with the
accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a
share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
15•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Flows
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1
Eurosystem 2
+ 4.1 ± 0.0 – 1.1 ± 0.0 +143.3 + 6.5 ± 0.0 +14.0 –43.0 +132.0 +36.8 +57.3 2021 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2022 Jan.
+38.5 + 0.1 – 7.3 ± 0.0 +94.6 –10.8 ± 0.0 +19.2 –46.3 +194.8 –31.0 –22.6 Feb.
+ 9.5 ± 0.0 – 0.2 ± 0.0 +91.8 +11.8 ± 0.0 +10.0 +60.6 –69.4 +88.5 +110.2 Mar.
+26.0 + 0.1 – 1.5 ± 0.0 +47.2 –31.1 ± 0.0 +25.3 +25.2 +25.6 +26.5 +20.8 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
+21.0 + 0.1 – 1.0 ± 0.0 +49.9 –33.6 ± 0.0 +15.6 –43.7 +12.4 +118.8 +100.9 June
+ 9.5 + 0.5 –49.4 ± 0.0 +19.7 – 2.6 ± 0.0 +12.5 +43.5 +28.9 –102.8 –93.0 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 6.4 + 0.7 –24.5 ± 0.0 – 4.0 +28.3 ± 0.0 –18.7 –113.7 +91.2 – 7.2 + 2.5 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
+ 5.7 + 2.3 – 6.1 ± 0.0 – 6.5 +3,783.0 ± 0.0 –21.6 –17.2 –144.8 –3,604.1 +157.2 Nov.
+ 4.6 – 2.1 –171.7 ± 0.0 – 2.2 +31.5 ± 0.0 – 2.9 –44.2 –37.5 –118.2 –89.5 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2023 Jan.
–20.0 – 0.7 –643.8 + 0.1 – 4.0 –469.9 ± 0.0 + 4.8 –119.7 –65.3 –18.2 –483.5 Feb.
–23.6 – 0.3 –70.0 – 0.1 – 3.1 +51.4 ± 0.0 –11.7 +7.4 –139.8 – 4.5 +35.3 Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr.
+28.2 + 0.5 –115.6 + 0.1 –33.4 –106.9 ± 0.0 + 5.9 –19.6 + 8.7 – 8.4 –109.4 May
+ 3.2 + 0.2 –17.2 ± 0.0 –21.5 +130.3 ± 0.0 + 3.9 –104.2 –63.9 – 1.1 +133.1 June
. . . . . . . . . . . . July
–20.4 + 9.3 –418.5 ± 0.0 –31.1 –422.0 ± 0.0 + 3.3 –2.0 –36.1 – 4.2 –422.8 Aug.
– 3.5 – 5.3 –81.0 ± 0.0 –41.8 –57.0 ± 0.0 – 2.8 –31.9 –36.7 – 3.1 –62.9 Sep.
+ 6.9 + 2.5 –85.6 ± 0.0 –43.3 –70.0 ± 0.0 – 9.5 +0.2 –40.5 + 0.3 –79.3 Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov.
+ 2.1 – 0.8 –19.5 – 0.1 –52.9 –28.6 ± 0.0 – 3.6 –28.6 – 8.0 – 2.6 –34.8 Dec.
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 1.0 – 0.1 + 1.2 – 0.0 +37.3 + 2.1 ± 0.0 + 3.5 +2.7 +15.7 +15.6 +21.1 2021 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2022 Jan.
+11.1 + 0.2 –18.6 + 0.0 +18.2 – 2.0 ± 0.0 + 3.7 –14.7 +54.3 –28.3 –26.6 Feb.
+ 3.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.0 +23.9 + 7.4 ± 0.0 + 3.5 –14.5 –28.6 +59.2 +70.1 Mar.
+ 8.2 – 0.0 – 0.9 – 0.0 +10.8 –14.2 ± 0.0 + 6.8 +5.6 + 4.6 +15.2 + 7.9 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
+ 6.6 + 0.1 – 0.6 – 0.0 +18.7 – 7.7 ± 0.0 + 3.0 +0.2 + 6.0 +24.1 +19.4 June
+ 1.3 + 0.2 –11.1 – 0.0 – 3.1 – 4.1 ± 0.0 + 2.4 +18.0 + 7.7 –37.7 –39.5 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 0.4 + 0.0 – 5.5 – 0.0 – 7.5 +42.7 ± 0.0 –10.8 –57.1 +13.5 – 0.9 +31.0 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
– 0.5 + 0.5 – 3.1 + 0.0 – 5.3 +1,075.5 ± 0.0 – 0.6 –30.7 –69.6 –982.9 +92.0 Nov.
+ 0.7 – 0.4 –48.0 + 0.0 + 7.7 +42.7 ± 0.0 – 0.1 –6.2 –11.0 –65.4 –22.9 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2023 Jan.
– 2.5 – 0.1 –120.6 + 0.1 – 2.4 –112.0 ± 0.0 – 1.6 –43.2 +37.0 – 5.6 –119.3 Feb.
– 1.0 + 0.0 –19.1 – 0.0 + 0.2 +29.1 ± 0.0 – 2.7 –8.6 –37.1 – 0.7 +25.7 Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr.
+10.3 + 0.2 –12.7 + 0.0 –11.0 –35.7 ± 0.0 + 1.2 +4.1 +21.4 – 4.1 –38.5 May
+ 2.6 + 0.1 – 1.3 + 0.0 – 9.3 +28.3 ± 0.0 + 1.4 –18.7 –20.7 + 1.9 +31.5 June
. . . . . . . . . . . . July
– 5.6 + 0.8 –56.5 – 0.0 – 8.0 –80.8 ± 0.0 + 0.4 –4.7 +19.3 – 3.5 –83.9 Aug.
– 1.7 – 0.7 –11.2 + 0.0 – 7.5 + 2.3 ± 0.0 – 0.2 –9.8 –13.0 – 0.4 + 1.6 Sep.
+ 1.2 + 0.5 –35.0 – 0.0 –17.3 –26.7 ± 0.0 – 2.4 –11.5 – 9.9 – 0.0 –29.1 Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov.
+ 1.1 – 0.6 – 7.1 – 0.0 – 7.3 +20.1 ± 0.0 – 1.4 –9.8 –22.3 – 0.7 +18.1 Dec.
allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is shown
under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the euro
banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB
has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other factors”. From 2003 eurobanknotes only.  6 Remaining items in the consolidated financial statement of the Euro-
system and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  7 Equal to the difference bet-
ween the sum of liquidity-pro viding factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors.
8 Calculated as the sum of the “Deposit facility”, “Banknotes in circulation” and “Credit
institutions' current account balances”.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
16•
III.Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets *
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currencyClaims on non-euro area
residents denominated in euro
As at
reporting
dateTotal
assets 
Gold and gold
receivables TotalReceivables
from the IMFBalances with
banks, security
investments,
external loans
and other
external
assetsClaims on
euro area
residents
denominated
in foreign
currency TotalBalances
with banks,
security
investments
and loansClaims
arising from
the credit
facility under
ERM II
Eurosystem 1
2023 June 16 7,709.7 632.8 502.4 231.0 271.4 13.1 13.7 13.7 –
23 7,710.6 632.8 500.3 231.1 269.2 14.8 13.8 13.8 –
30 7,219.7 609.3 497.5 229.1 268.5 13.3 15.8 15.8 –
July 7 7,206.9 609.3 499.1 229.1 270.0 12.1 13.9 13.9 –
14 7,205.5 609.3 497.7 229.0 268.6 13.7 14.1 14.1 –
21 7,186.9 609.3 496.6 228.9 267.6 14.3 14.2 14.2 –
28 7,189.3 609.3 497.8 229.0 268.8 12.9 14.2 14.2 –
Aug. 4 7,164.6 609.3 497.0 229.1 267.9 14.0 14.1 14.1 –
11 7,166.5 609.3 498.2 229.6 268.6 13.3 14.2 14.2 –
18 7,153.1 609.3 498.7 230.0 268.7 13.6 14.3 14.3 –
25 7,154.9 609.3 497.9 230.0 268.0 13.9 14.3 14.3 –
Sep. 1 7,168.2 609.3 498.7 231.3 267.4 14.2 14.1 14.1 –
8 7,153.1 609.3 498.3 231.3 267.1 14.3 14.0 14.0 –
15 7,135.7 609.3 497.2 231.3 265.9 14.7 14.2 14.2 –
22 7,142.0 609.3 497.3 231.3 266.0 14.5 14.5 14.5 –
29 7,066.5 613.3 502.4 234.2 268.2 15.4 14.2 14.2 –
Oct. 6 7,057.1 613.3 504.0 234.2 269.8 14.9 14.6 14.6 –
13 7,056.7 613.3 504.8 234.2 270.6 14.5 14.6 14.6 –
20 7,038.0 613.3 504.9 234.0 270.8 14.5 14.6 14.6 –
27 7,019.7 613.3 506.1 234.1 271.9 14.0 14.9 14.9 –
Nov. 3 7,001.6 613.3 506.4 234.2 272.1 13.6 14.8 14.8 –
10 6,998.9 613.3 506.2 234.3 272.0 14.5 15.2 15.2 –
17 7,001.1 613.3 507.1 234.0 273.0 14.5 15.0 15.0 –
24 6,995.8 613.3 507.4 234.1 273.3 14.2 15.2 15.2 –
Dec. 1 7,002.0 613.3 507.4 234.1 273.3 13.9 15.0 15.0 –
8 6,993.5 613.3 506.7 234.1 272.6 14.7 15.0 15.0 –
15 6,987.4 613.3 507.6 234.1 273.5 14.2 15.0 15.0 –
22 6,899.2 613.3 507.9 233.7 274.2 15.4 14.9 14.9 –
29 6,935.5 649.1 499.6 229.0 270.6 13.9 20.1 20.1 –
2024 Jan. 5 6,919.8 649.1 499.9 229.5 270.5 13.3 15.3 15.3 –
Deutsche Bundesbank
2023 June 16 2,671.3 196.3 92.3 58.2 34.1 0.0 – – –
23 2,646.6 196.3 92.4 58.2 34.2 0.0 – – –
30 2,590.6 189.0 91.8 57.9 33.9 0.0 1.9 1.9 –
July 7 2,569.4 189.0 91.8 57.9 33.8 0.0 – – –
14 2,551.9 189.0 91.7 57.9 33.9 0.0 – – –
21 2,550.2 189.0 91.7 57.9 33.8 0.0 – – –
28 2,547.0 189.0 91.7 57.9 33.8 0.0 – – –
Aug. 4 2,562.8 189.0 91.9 58.0 33.9 0.0 – – –
11 2,552.0 189.0 91.6 58.0 33.7 0.0 – – –
18 2,559.4 189.0 92.2 58.2 34.0 0.0 – – –
25 2,550.9 189.0 92.0 58.2 33.7 0.0 – – –
Sep. 1 2,577.3 189.0 91.9 58.2 33.6 0.0 – – –
8 2,561.7 189.0 91.9 58.2 33.7 0.0 – – –
15 2,551.1 189.0 91.7 58.2 33.5 0.0 – – –
22 2,528.2 189.0 91.8 58.2 33.6 0.0 – – –
29 2,510.1 190.2 92.3 58.9 33.3 0.0 – – –
Oct. 6 2,506.6 190.2 92.3 58.9 33.4 0.0 – – –
13 2,504.5 190.2 92.5 58.9 33.6 0.0 – – –
20 2,509.3 190.2 92.7 58.9 33.8 0.0 – – –
27 2,512.0 190.2 93.1 58.9 34.2 0.0 – – –
Nov. 3 2,535.6 190.2 93.3 59.0 34.3 0.0 – – –
10 2,532.7 190.2 93.5 59.0 34.4 0.0 – – –
17 2,513.2 190.2 93.3 58.9 34.4 0.0 – – –
24 2,522.1 190.2 93.3 58.9 34.4 0.0 – – –
Dec. 1 2,511.5 190.2 93.2 58.9 34.3 0.0 – – –
8 2,536.1 190.2 93.2 58.9 34.3 0.0 – – –
15 2,512.8 190.2 92.9 58.9 34.0 0.0 – – –
22 2,490.5 190.2 92.6 58.7 33.9 0.0 – – –
29 2,536.2 201.3 90.9 57.5 33.4 0.0 5.2 5.2 –
2024 Jan. 5 2,501.5 201.3 90.4 58.0 32.3 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet itemsfor foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the end of
the quarter.  1 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
17•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euroSecurities of euro area residents
in euro
TotalMain re-
financing
opera-
tionsLonger-
term re-
financing
opera-
tionsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsStructural
reverse
opera-
tionsMarginal
lending
facility 
 
 
 
Credits
related
to margin
callsOther
claims on
euro area
credit
institutions
denomi-
nated in
euro TotalSecurities
held for
monetary
policy
purposesOther
securitiesGeneral
government
debt deno-
minated in
euroOther
assetsAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 1
1,101.9 1.2 1,100.7 – – 0.1 – 42.1 5,054.0 4,867.8 186.2 21.5 328.3 2023 June 16
1,102.0 1.2 1,100.7 – – 0.1 – 43.1 5,052.9 4,866.2 186.7 21.5 329.4 23
616.7 18.6 598.0 – – 0.2 – 42.6 5,045.1 4,858.9 186.2 21.0 358.4 30
610.5 12.5 598.0 – – 0.0 – 41.9 5,047.8 4,860.1 187.7 21.0 351.2 July 7
609.9 11.8 598.0 – – 0.1 – 33.6 5,050.5 4,860.6 189.9 21.0 355.8 14
608.1 10.0 598.0 – – 0.1 – 38.2 5,031.5 4,841.8 189.8 21.0 353.7 21
611.7 11.0 600.4 – – 0.2 – 33.9 5,027.2 4,837.3 189.8 21.0 361.4 28
607.8 7.4 600.4 – – 0.0 – 35.6 5,011.7 4,822.4 189.4 21.0 354.1 Aug. 4
606.1 5.7 600.4 – – 0.0 – 29.3 5,014.2 4,824.7 189.4 21.0 361.1 11
605.9 5.2 600.4 – – 0.3 – 30.2 4,999.3 4,808.8 190.5 21.0 360.8 18
606.4 5.9 600.4 – – 0.0 – 28.3 4,999.8 4,808.3 191.6 21.0 364.0 25
608.9 7.0 601.9 – – 0.1 – 31.1 5,001.9 4,809.5 192.4 21.0 369.1 Sep. 1
605.8 3.9 601.9 – – 0.0 – 24.5 5,003.0 4,810.2 192.7 21.0 362.9 8
605.9 4.0 601.9 – – 0.0 – 27.2 4,986.1 4,793.2 192.9 21.0 360.2 15
605.9 4.0 601.9 – – 0.0 – 33.4 4,984.5 4,789.2 195.3 21.0 361.6 22
509.8 11.4 498.5 – – – – 35.2 4,976.4 4,779.8 196.6 21.0 378.7 29
506.3 7.8 498.5 – – 0.0 – 23.4 4,977.6 4,777.8 199.8 21.0 382.0 Oct. 6
506.0 7.5 498.5 – – 0.0 – 26.9 4,974.1 4,772.9 201.2 21.0 381.6 13
506.2 7.7 498.5 – – 0.0 – 24.6 4,957.0 4,754.0 203.0 21.0 382.0 20
506.6 10.5 495.8 – – 0.3 – 24.5 4,936.6 4,734.6 202.0 21.0 382.7 27
504.0 8.1 495.8 – – – – 25.8 4,925.3 4,724.6 200.7 21.0 377.5 Nov. 3
502.7 6.9 495.8 – – – – 25.8 4,922.2 4,721.7 200.5 21.0 378.0 10
503.0 7.1 495.8 – – 0.0 – 24.7 4,921.9 4,720.9 201.1 21.0 380.6 17
503.2 7.3 495.8 – – 0.0 – 23.9 4,917.6 4,715.7 201.9 21.0 380.1 24
504.4 8.5 496.0 – – – – 31.6 4,911.2 4,709.4 201.7 21.0 384.3 Dec. 1
502.5 6.5 496.0 – – – – 25.5 4,913.6 4,710.5 203.1 21.0 381.3 8
502.7 6.5 496.0 – – 0.3 – 27.0 4,905.7 4,701.4 204.3 21.0 380.9 15
404.8 8.4 396.2 – – 0.2 – 33.5 4,904.0 4,701.3 202.7 21.0 384.5 22
410.3 14.1 396.2 – – 0.0 – 28.7 4,899.0 4,694.3 204.6 20.9 393.9 29
403.6 7.4 396.2 – – – – 32.0 4,895.2 4,691.0 204.2 20.9 390.5 2024 Jan. 5
Deutsche Bundesbank
199.5 0.5 198.9 – – 0.1 – 11.3 1,050.0 1,050.0 – 4.4 1,117.5 2023 June 16
199.5 0.5 198.9 – – 0.1 – 10.3 1,050.5 1,050.5 – 4.4 1,093.3 23
134.0 2.8 131.1 – – 0.2 – 10.3 1,048.1 1,048.1 – 4.4 1,111.0 30
132.6 1.5 131.1 – – 0.0 – 11.6 1,048.8 1,048.8 – 4.4 1,091.2 July 7
132.5 1.3 131.1 – – 0.1 – 9.8 1,048.9 1,048.9 – 4.4 1,075.6 14
132.5 1.3 131.1 – – 0.1 – 11.4 1,047.8 1,047.8 – 4.4 1,073.4 21
133.2 1.7 131.2 – – 0.2 – 12.3 1,048.6 1,048.6 – 4.4 1,067.8 28
132.1 0.9 131.2 – – 0.0 – 11.5 1,049.2 1,049.2 – 4.4 1,084.6 Aug. 4
131.9 0.7 131.2 – – 0.0 – 12.0 1,050.2 1,050.2 – 4.4 1,072.9 11
131.8 0.2 131.2 – – 0.3 – 13.0 1,039.8 1,039.8 – 4.4 1,089.1 18
132.2 1.0 131.2 – – 0.0 – 10.0 1,038.8 1,038.8 – 4.4 1,084.5 25
132.5 1.3 131.2 – – 0.1 – 12.0 1,039.5 1,039.5 – 4.4 1,107.9 Sep. 1
131.9 0.6 131.2 – – 0.0 – 10.2 1,039.7 1,039.7 – 4.4 1,094.5 8
131.8 0.6 131.2 – – 0.0 – 9.7 1,030.6 1,030.6 – 4.4 1,093.8 15
131.9 0.7 131.2 – – 0.0 – 11.3 1,027.8 1,027.8 – 4.4 1,071.9 22
91.3 2.0 89.3 – – – – 9.6 1,027.0 1,027.0 – 4.4 1,095.4 29
90.3 1.1 89.3 – – – – 9.6 1,027.2 1,027.2 – 4.4 1,092.5 Oct. 6
90.3 1.0 89.3 – – 0.0 – 11.6 1,020.4 1,020.4 – 4.4 1,095.0 13
90.4 1.1 89.3 – – 0.0 – 10.9 1,019.4 1,019.4 – 4.4 1,101.2 20
91.4 1.8 89.2 – – 0.3 – 11.6 1,019.8 1,019.8 – 4.4 1,101.4 27
90.2 0.9 89.2 – – 0.0 – 11.5 1,020.6 1,020.6 – 4.4 1,125.3 Nov. 3
89.9 0.7 89.2 – – – – 12.6 1,018.9 1,018.9 – 4.4 1,123.1 10
90.2 0.9 89.2 – – 0.0 – 11.5 1,018.3 1,018.3 – 4.4 1,105.3 17
90.1 0.9 89.2 – – 0.0 – 11.8 1,015.7 1,015.7 – 4.4 1,116.5 24
90.0 0.9 89.1 – – – – 12.0 1,015.6 1,015.6 – 4.4 1,106.0 Dec. 1
89.5 0.3 89.1 – – – – 12.2 1,016.3 1,016.3 – 4.4 1,130.2 8
89.6 0.2 89.1 – – 0.3 – 10.4 1,010.5 1,010.5 – 4.4 1,114.8 15
70.4 0.7 69.5 – – 0.2 – 10.4 1,010.2 1,010.2 – 4.4 1,112.2 22
72.3 2.7 69.5 – – – – 5.8 1,009.1 1,009.1 – 4.4 1,147.2 29
69.9 0.4 69.5 – – – – 9.6 1,005.6 1,005.6 – 4.4 1,119.9 2024 Jan. 5

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
18•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
2. Liabilities *
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to
monetary policy operations denominated in euroLiabilities to
other euro area residents
denominated in euro
As at
reporting
date 
Total
liabilitiesBanknotes
in circu-
lation  1 TotalCurrent
accounts
(covering
the
minimum
reserve
system)Deposit
facilityFixed-
term
depositsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsDeposits
related to
margin
callsOther
liabilities
to euro 
area credit
institutions
deno-
minated
in euroDebt
certifi-
cates
issued TotalGeneral
govern-
mentOther
liabilities
Eurosystem 3
2023 June 16 7,709.7 1,564.4 4,309.6 193.6 4,115.6 – – 0.3 37.2 – 337.6 239.8 97.8
23 7,710.6 1,563.8 4,289.7 185.2 4,104.4 – – 0.1 41.0 – 351.1 255.9 95.2
30 7,219.7 1,566.1 3,751.3 174.5 3,576.8 – – 0.0 51.9 – 353.0 258.1 94.9
July 7 7,206.9 1,568.2 3,836.7 166.9 3,669.8 – – 0.0 34.3 – 318.4 230.9 87.6
14 7,205.5 1,568.8 3,827.8 156.4 3,671.4 – – 0.0 32.3 – 338.9 250.6 88.2
21 7,186.9 1,567.7 3,791.3 157.3 3,634.0 – – 0.0 33.9 – 346.8 260.8 86.0
28 7,189.3 1,569.0 3,770.2 185.1 3,585.1 – – 0.0 32.8 – 370.5 281.6 88.9
Aug. 4 7,164.6 1,569.4 3,818.4 168.0 3,650.3 – – 0.0 30.9 – 305.9 219.0 86.9
11 7,166.5 1,569.6 3,821.8 177.2 3,644.6 – – 0.0 33.2 – 311.2 224.6 86.5
18 7,153.1 1,567.0 3,812.6 149.5 3,663.0 – – 0.0 33.7 – 305.5 219.0 86.5
25 7,154.9 1,563.1 3,815.8 148.6 3,667.1 – – 0.0 35.1 – 313.6 227.8 85.8
Sep. 1 7,168.2 1,562.3 3,821.1 163.6 3,657.5 – – 0.0 37.2 – 311.9 220.8 91.1
8 7,153.1 1,560.5 3,841.8 159.4 3,682.4 – – 0.0 37.5 – 299.0 214.2 84.8
15 7,135.7 1,558.7 3,813.2 223.3 3,589.9 – – 0.0 33.7 – 316.1 232.1 84.1
22 7,142.0 1,556.2 3,823.4 162.6 3,660.8 – – 0.0 38.7 – 310.3 228.0 82.4
29 7,066.5 1,557.6 3,640.8 173.8 3,467.0 – – 0.0 46.2 – 350.0 262.1 87.9
Oct. 6 7,057.1 1,556.9 3,756.3 153.2 3,603.1 – – 0.0 33.1 – 289.1 211.5 77.7
13 7,056.7 1,554.6 3,763.4 161.0 3,602.3 – – 0.0 35.6 – 305.2 224.1 81.1
20 7,038.0 1,551.7 3,749.9 162.5 3,587.3 – – 0.0 35.5 – 293.0 217.3 75.7
27 7,019.7 1,552.4 3,733.7 200.4 3,533.3 – – 0.0 35.9 – 285.6 205.2 80.4
Nov. 3 7,001.6 1,553.2 3,716.4 167.1 3,549.3 – – 0.0 37.6 – 281.4 200.5 80.9
10 6,998.9 1,550.0 3,715.8 154.9 3,560.9 – – 0.0 37.8 – 284.9 206.1 78.8
17 7,001.1 1,547.9 3,726.7 162.6 3,564.1 – – 0.0 37.5 – 280.2 202.0 78.2
24 6,995.8 1,547.2 3,706.3 157.0 3,549.3 – – 0.0 37.4 – 289.4 210.3 79.1
Dec. 1 7,002.0 1,549.8 3,722.2 163.0 3,559.2 – – 0.0 36.1 – 267.1 184.2 83.0
8 6,993.5 1,554.3 3,732.4 165.6 3,566.8 – – 0.0 36.9 – 257.2 173.1 84.1
15 6,987.4 1,556.6 3,725.2 191.5 3,533.7 – – 0.0 36.2 – 259.8 177.5 82.3
22 6,899.2 1,565.1 3,649.6 204.0 3,445.6 – – 0.0 40.1 – 232.5 145.0 87.5
29 6,935.5 1,567.7 3,508.9 174.0 3,334.8 – – 0.0 58.9 – 303.9 212.8 91.1
2024 Jan. 5 6,919.8 1,561.6 3,679.9 139.7 3,540.1 – – 0.0 40.0 – 239.9 158.8 81.1
Deutsche Bundesbank
2023 June 16 2,671.3 377.7 1,312.0 58.1 1,253.6 – – 0.3 9.1 – 72.2 47.7 24.6
23 2,646.6 377.3 1,285.3 52.8 1,232.4 – – 0.0 10.6 – 73.5 51.0 22.5
30 2,590.6 376.6 1,202.5 49.1 1,153.3 – – 0.0 14.4 – 71.8 48.1 23.7
July 7 2,569.4 377.7 1,228.2 42.2 1,185.9 – – 0.0 10.6 – 64.6 42.1 22.5
14 2,551.9 378.0 1,201.0 41.8 1,159.2 – – 0.0 7.7 – 78.2 57.6 20.6
21 2,550.2 377.5 1,209.1 42.2 1,166.9 – – 0.0 9.1 – 65.8 45.0 20.8
28 2,547.0 378.6 1,193.6 59.1 1,134.4 – – 0.0 8.4 – 74.7 54.0 20.7
Aug. 4 2,562.8 378.1 1,227.7 51.2 1,176.5 – – 0.0 6.8 – 57.1 37.9 19.2
11 2,552.0 378.2 1,221.6 63.1 1,158.4 – – 0.0 8.4 – 55.9 35.8 20.1
18 2,559.4 377.9 1,222.5 35.6 1,186.9 – – 0.0 9.4 – 60.4 40.3 20.0
25 2,550.9 377.7 1,223.6 34.7 1,188.8 – – 0.0 9.3 – 56.8 38.4 18.5
Sep. 1 2,577.3 375.8 1,244.3 42.7 1,201.6 – – 0.0 10.9 – 59.0 38.7 20.3
8 2,561.7 376.6 1,235.5 41.5 1,194.0 – – 0.0 9.4 – 56.2 37.6 18.5
15 2,551.1 376.8 1,208.2 66.8 1,141.4 – – 0.0 7.4 – 70.2 52.5 17.8
22 2,528.2 376.4 1,206.6 44.8 1,161.8 – – 0.0 9.8 – 56.6 38.4 18.3
29 2,510.1 374.6 1,149.6 48.6 1,101.0 – – 0.0 11.7 – 53.8 35.1 18.7
Oct. 6 2,506.6 375.0 1,201.7 40.2 1,161.5 – – 0.0 7.8 – 39.0 24.7 14.3
13 2,504.5 374.6 1,193.8 40.4 1,153.4 – – 0.0 8.0 – 45.5 29.3 16.1
20 2,509.3 374.1 1,210.3 40.7 1,169.6 – – 0.0 7.5 – 36.1 21.0 15.1
27 2,512.0 374.6 1,205.4 57.0 1,148.4 – – 0.0 7.0 – 39.7 24.0 15.7
Nov. 3 2,535.6 373.5 1,230.9 47.9 1,183.0 – – 0.0 6.8 – 36.7 20.5 16.2
10 2,532.7 372.9 1,219.5 41.0 1,178.5 – – 0.0 8.4 – 37.8 22.4 15.5
17 2,513.2 372.7 1,205.5 40.4 1,165.0 – – 0.0 6.9 – 34.2 18.9 15.3
24 2,522.1 372.4 1,221.3 39.9 1,181.4 – – 0.0 7.6 – 28.8 13.3 15.5
Dec. 1 2,511.5 372.8 1,207.9 42.8 1,165.0 – – 0.0 7.3 – 31.5 15.5 16.1
8 2,536.1 374.6 1,232.8 42.5 1,190.3 – – 0.0 7.3 – 30.7 15.8 14.9
15 2,512.8 376.2 1,191.5 59.6 1,131.9 – – 0.0 5.7 – 45.3 31.1 14.2
22 2,490.5 378.9 1,173.8 54.2 1,119.6 – – 0.0 6.6 – 35.1 18.5 16.6
29 2,536.2 377.0 1,109.9 53.0 1,056.8 – – 0.0 14.5 – 44.4 26.0 18.5
2024 Jan. 5 2,501.5 381.5 1,189.7 38.5 1,151.2 – – 0.0 8.9 – 37.4 22.5 14.9
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet items
for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at marketrates at the end of the quarrter.  1 In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen
by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of
the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthy basis. The
counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an "Intra-Eurosystem liability related to

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
19•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Liabilities
to non-euro
area residents
denominated
in euroLiabilities
to euro area
residents
in foreign
currency TotalDeposits,
balances
and other
liabilitiesLiabilities
arising
from the
credit facility
under ERM IICounterpart
of special
drawing
rights allocated
by the IMFOther
liabilities  2Intra-
Eurosystem
liability
related to
euro
banknote
issue  1 
 
 
 
 
Revaluation
accountsCapital
and
reservesAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 3
248.5 12.5 7.1 7.1 – 180.3 270.3 – 622.2 120.2 2023 June 16
252.0 13.0 6.7 6.7 – 180.3 270.6 – 622.2 120.2 23
300.3 13.4 6.6 6.6 – 178.4 281.5 – 597.0 120.2 30
258.8 13.5 6.5 6.5 – 178.4 274.9 – 597.0 120.2 July 7
250.5 13.6 6.0 6.0 – 178.4 272.1 – 597.0 120.2 14
257.1 13.5 6.7 6.7 – 178.4 274.2 – 597.0 120.2 21
255.9 13.8 4.4 4.4 – 178.4 277.1 – 597.0 120.2 28
253.5 13.7 3.8 3.8 – 178.4 273.4 – 597.0 120.2 Aug. 4
245.7 13.9 4.5 4.5 – 178.4 271.0 – 597.0 120.2 11
245.9 14.3 6.3 6.3 – 178.4 272.4 – 597.0 120.2 18
238.9 14.5 5.5 5.5 – 178.4 272.7 – 597.0 120.2 25
242.4 14.3 4.3 4.3 – 178.4 279.1 – 597.0 120.2 Sep. 1
233.9 13.9 3.1 3.1 – 178.4 267.7 – 597.0 120.2 8
234.2 13.8 3.5 3.5 – 178.4 266.8 – 597.0 120.2 15
232.7 13.9 4.3 4.3 – 178.4 266.9 – 597.0 120.2 22
273.5 13.6 3.9 3.9 – 180.7 275.7 – 604.2 120.2 29
228.3 14.5 3.2 3.2 – 180.7 270.4 – 604.2 120.2 Oct. 6
208.3 14.8 3.3 3.3 – 180.7 266.4 – 604.2 120.2 13
215.5 15.5 4.1 4.1 – 180.7 267.7 – 604.2 120.2 20
222.3 15.7 4.2 4.2 – 180.7 264.7 – 604.2 120.2 27
226.5 15.6 3.9 3.9 – 180.7 262.0 – 604.2 120.2 Nov. 3
228.2 16.1 4.2 4.2 – 180.7 256.7 – 604.2 120.2 10
227.1 16.2 3.9 3.9 – 180.7 256.6 – 604.2 120.2 17
233.8 16.1 4.8 4.8 – 180.7 255.7 – 604.2 120.2 24
237.3 15.9 4.8 4.8 – 180.7 263.8 – 604.2 120.2 Dec. 1
233.2 16.6 4.3 4.3 – 180.7 253.4 – 604.2 120.2 8
232.7 17.3 4.2 4.2 – 180.7 250.2 – 604.2 120.2 15
229.7 18.0 4.5 4.5 – 180.7 254.6 – 604.2 120.2 22
281.9 16.4 4.5 4.5 – 177.1 260.9 – 635.1 120.2 29
193.7 17.6 3.5 3.5 – 177.1 251.1 – 635.1 120.3 2024 Jan. 5
Deutsche Bundesbank
91.4 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.5 34.7 529.0 193.2 5.5 2023 June 16
90.7 0.1 0.1 0.1 – 46.5 34.8 529.0 193.2 5.5 23
122.0 0.2 – – – 46.0 35.4 530.7 185.5 5.5 30
85.1 0.2 – – – 46.0 35.4 530.7 185.5 5.5 July 7
83.7 0.2 – – – 46.0 35.4 530.7 185.5 5.5 14
85.2 0.1 – – – 46.0 35.5 530.7 185.5 5.5 21
88.1 0.1 – – – 46.0 35.7 530.7 185.5 5.5 28
88.4 0.1 0.2 0.2 – 46.0 35.0 532.2 185.5 5.5 Aug. 4
83.3 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.0 35.1 532.2 185.5 5.5 11
82.7 0.1 0.5 0.5 – 46.0 36.5 532.2 185.5 5.5 18
76.6 0.1 0.5 0.5 – 46.0 37.0 532.2 185.5 5.5 25
77.9 0.1 0.2 0.2 – 46.0 36.7 535.1 185.5 5.5 Sep. 1
74.9 0.1 0.2 0.2 – 46.0 36.5 535.1 185.5 5.5 8
79.4 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 46.0 36.8 535.1 185.5 5.5 15
69.5 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.0 36.9 535.1 185.5 5.5 22
104.8 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 37.3 538.7 187.4 5.5 29
67.6 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 37.1 538.7 187.4 5.5 Oct. 6
67.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 37.2 538.7 187.4 5.5 13
65.7 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 37.2 538.7 187.4 5.5 20
69.6 0.1 0.2 0.2 – 46.6 37.1 538.7 187.4 5.5 27
71.3 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 36.5 540.2 187.4 5.5 Nov. 3
77.5 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 36.6 540.2 187.4 5.5 10
77.4 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 36.7 540.2 187.4 5.5 17
75.4 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 36.8 540.2 187.4 5.5 24
74.3 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 36.7 541.3 187.4 5.5 Dec. 1
72.8 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 36.9 541.3 187.4 5.5 8
76.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 37.1 541.3 187.4 5.5 15
77.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 37.2 541.3 187.4 5.5 22
161.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 45.7 37.3 543.7 197.1 5.5 29
75.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 45.7 23.2 536.7 197.1 5.5 2024 Jan. 5
euro banknote issue". The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on an monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the eurobanknotes allocated to the NCB according to the aforementioned accounting
procedure and the value of euro banknotes put into circulation is also disclosed as an
"Intra-Eurosystem claim/liability related to banknote issue".  2 For the Deutsche Bundes-
bank: including DEM banknotes still in circulation.  3 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
20•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Assets
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the 
to banks in the home country to banks in other Member States to non-banks in the home country 
Enterprises and house- 
holds   
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1Cash
in hand Total Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Total Total Loans
End of year or month 
2013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2018 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2019 8,311.0 43.4 2,230.1 1,759.8 1,493.5 266.3 470.4 327.6 142.8 4,020.1 3,584.9 3,168.7 2,864.9
2020 8,943.3 47.5 2,622.7 2,177.9 1,913.5 264.4 444.8 307.1 137.7 4,179.6 3,709.8 3,297.0 2,993.1
2021 9,172.2 49.7 2,789.6 2,333.0 2,069.6 263.4 456.6 324.4 132.2 4,350.4 3,860.4 3,468.8 3,147.6
2022 10,517.9 20.0 2,935.2 2,432.2 2,169.2 263.0 502.9 359.6 143.3 4,584.6 4,079.3 3,702.9 3,365.4
2022 Feb. 9,842.7 47.7 3,082.6 2,564.8 2,299.1 265.8 517.8 383.9 133.9 4,396.3 3,889.1 3,504.4 3,181.6
Mar. 9,962.9 50.0 3,066.9 2,546.2 2,281.9 264.3 520.7 387.1 133.7 4,426.8 3,916.4 3,526.5 3,204.1
Apr. 10,268.8 51.0 3,112.2 2,578.0 2,313.7 264.2 534.2 400.5 133.8 4,434.6 3,929.2 3,546.3 3,223.8
May 10,258.0 50.0 3,122.7 2,592.6 2,326.2 266.4 530.1 397.8 132.3 4,460.3 3,949.5 3,567.4 3,244.7
June 10,428.9 51.8 3,096.5 2,570.9 2,306.2 264.7 525.6 394.1 131.5 4,494.4 3,969.5 3,589.6 3,268.8
July 10,267.9 42.3 3,086.0 2,557.4 2,291.5 266.0 528.6 396.8 131.8 4,528.3 4,008.2 3,627.9 3,293.6
Aug. 10,627.2 23.6 3,166.4 2,625.3 2,359.2 266.1 541.1 409.1 132.0 4,555.4 4,039.2 3,664.4 3,331.1
Sep. 11,063.0 20.7 3,268.0 2,714.2 2,442.2 272.0 553.7 419.7 134.0 4,579.6 4,057.2 3,685.0 3,351.1
Oct. 11,036.0 20.0 3,259.8 2,696.8 2,424.2 272.6 563.0 416.3 146.7 4,591.1 4,077.8 3,699.7 3,365.9
Nov. 10,762.4 19.1 3,180.1 2,630.6 2,360.1 270.5 549.5 403.2 146.2 4,610.5 4,089.4 3,715.1 3,379.3
Dec. 10,517.9 20.0 2,935.2 2,432.2 2,169.2 263.0 502.9 359.6 143.3 4,584.6 4,079.3 3,702.9 3,365.4
2023 Jan. 10,585.0 18.2 3,085.7 2,550.5 2,288.2 262.3 535.1 383.8 151.4 4,600.1 4,080.1 3,706.1 3,372.3
Feb. 10,760.9 18.0 3,085.7 2,541.4 2,274.9 266.5 544.3 390.6 153.8 4,614.2 4,094.2 3,714.7 3,381.3
Mar. 10,553.8 17.9 3,041.3 2,497.8 2,229.3 268.4 543.5 391.2 152.3 4,620.6 4,094.7 3,718.2 3,386.0
Apr. 10,564.3 18.9 3,047.7 2,507.0 2,237.3 269.7 540.7 384.5 156.2 4,630.5 4,096.8 3,721.7 3,390.4
May 10,653.7 18.2 3,091.2 2,550.3 2,279.7 270.6 541.0 383.4 157.5 4,642.2 4,103.4 3,733.0 3,400.9
June 10,577.7 17.7 2,967.0 2,434.5 2,166.3 268.2 532.5 371.5 161.0 4,646.7 4,108.0 3,734.5 3,397.1
July 10,743.2 17.2 3,002.4 2,456.4 2,188.8 267.6 546.0 384.8 161.2 4,651.1 4,114.5 3,738.2 3,402.0
Aug. 10,735.3 17.5 2,994.8 2,455.6 2,187.1 268.4 539.2 377.9 161.4 4,649.4 4,111.7 3,733.9 3,400.6
Sep. 10,737.5 18.0 2,916.4 2,371.6 2,106.3 265.3 544.8 382.8 162.0 4,649.8 4,113.1 3,735.7 3,401.7
Oct. 10,797.9 17.5 2,980.6 2,430.9 2,165.6 265.3 549.7 387.7 162.1 4,653.7 4,116.8 3,736.3 3,401.6
Nov. 10,610.0 16.9 2,986.9 2,438.3 2,168.3 270.0 548.7 386.5 162.2 4,666.1 4,122.9 3,740.7 3,406.8
Changes 3
2014 206.8 0.4 –126.2 –128.6 –95.3 –33.4 2.4 7.2 – 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2015 –191.4 0.3 –18.2 –12.1 66.1 –78.2 – 6.1 6.6 –12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 –16.8 –58.1 – 49.2 – 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.0
2017 8.0 6.1 135.9 165.0 182.6 –17.6 –29.1 – 19.6 – 9.5 51.3 63.5 114.8 101.1
2018 101.8 8.5 –29.2 –49.7 –53.4 3.7 20.6 13.0 7.6 78.7 71.9 118.1 127.8
2019 483.4 2.8 20.7 – 3.8 – 2.3 – 1.5 24.5 16.9 7.5 161.8 130.5 148.2 140.9
2020 769.5 4.1 505.4 524.2 512.6 11.6 –18.8 – 16.2 – 2.6 161.0 130.0 132.3 132.2
2021 207.2 2.2 161.3 155.6 156.4 – 0.8 5.7 11.7 – 5.9 175.7 154.6 173.7 155.9
2022 1,170.5 –29.7 149.5 103.7 100.5 3.2 45.8 33.1 12.7 242.4 223.1 237.5 220.6
2022 Mar. 119.7 2.2 –15.5 –18.4 –17.2 – 1.2 2.9 3.0 – 0.1 31.4 27.6 22.2 22.6
Apr. 283.1 1.0 41.6 30.8 30.8 0.0 10.8 10.6 0.2 7.5 12.8 19.7 19.4
May 1.1 – 1.0 12.4 15.3 12.8 2.5 – 2.9 – 1.5 – 1.3 27.4 21.2 21.6 21.3
June 178.6 1.7 –28.2 –22.2 –20.6 – 1.6 – 6.0 – 5.3 – 0.6 32.9 19.9 22.0 23.7
July –177.9 – 9.5 –12.8 –14.2 –15.0 0.8 1.4 1.4 0.0 29.7 36.0 36.0 22.6
Aug. 359.0 –18.7 83.5 71.7 70.7 1.0 11.8 11.3 0.4 28.1 31.4 36.5 37.5
Sep. 428.4 – 2.9 99.8 88.6 82.4 6.2 11.3 9.0 2.3 27.0 17.2 19.5 18.7
Oct. –19.3 – 0.7 – 6.7 –17.0 –17.7 0.6 10.3 – 2.4 12.7 12.4 21.1 15.3 15.5
Nov. –245.9 – 0.9 –75.9 –65.0 –63.0 – 2.0 –10.9 – 10.5 – 0.5 21.4 13.0 17.1 15.1
Dec. –225.1 0.9 –240.0 –196.2 –189.2 – 7.1 –43.8 – 41.2 – 2.6 –24.0 – 8.4 – 9.9 –11.6
2023 Jan. 87.5 – 1.8 155.0 122.2 119.3 2.8 32.8 24.0 8.9 22.8 6.5 8.1 8.0
Feb. 167.0 – 0.2 – 0.8 – 9.1 –13.4 4.3 8.3 5.8 2.5 13.4 13.6 7.9 8.3
Mar. –195.2 – 0.1 –42.8 –43.2 –45.0 1.8 0.4 1.9 – 1.5 8.2 2.0 5.0 6.2
Apr. 16.7 1.0 7.7 9.8 8.1 1.7 – 2.1 – 6.0 3.9 11.0 3.0 4.2 5.1
May 91.9 – 0.7 41.9 42.2 41.3 0.9 – 0.2 – 1.6 1.3 12.3 6.8 11.5 10.6
June –65.9 – 0.5 –121.0 –113.5 –112.5 – 1.1 – 7.5 – 11.0 3.5 4.7 5.5 2.5 – 1.7
July 170.6 – 0.5 34.6 22.2 22.7 – 0.6 12.4 12.2 0.2 6.0 7.6 4.7 5.8
Aug. –15.1 0.3 – 7.6 – 1.1 – 1.9 0.8 – 6.5 – 6.6 0.1 – 0.5 – 2.4 – 3.9 – 1.0
Sep. 1.6 0.6 –78.5 –83.9 –80.8 – 3.1 5.3 4.7 0.7 1.6 2.3 2.7 2.0
Oct. 68.3 – 0.5 64.7 59.5 59.5 0.0 5.1 5.1 0.1 5.1 4.6 1.5 0.9
Nov. –188.9 – 0.6 6.0 7.3 2.6 4.6 – 1.2 – 1.2 – 0.0 12.5 6.5 5.5 6.3
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.  1 See
footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
21•
IV. Banks
euro area
to non-banks in other Member States 
Claims on non-euro area
residents
 
  
General governmentEnterprises and
households 
General government
 
Securities Total Loans 
Securities  2Total Totalof which:
Loans Total Loans 
Securities Totalof which:
LoansOther
assets  1 Period
End of year or month
262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013
276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016
308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 2017
297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2 2018
303.8 416.2 254.7 161.6 435.2 312.6 199.0 122.6 29.4 93.2 1,035.8 777.5 981.5 2019
303.9 412.8 252.3 160.5 469.8 327.5 222.2 142.3 29.7 112.7 1,003.2 751.2 1,090.3 2020
321.2 391.6 245.1 146.5 490.1 362.7 244.0 127.4 28.4 99.0 1,094.2 853.3 888.3 2021
337.5 376.4 248.0 128.4 505.3 384.9 270.2 120.4 30.8 89.6 1,137.2 882.9 1,841.0 2022
322.8 384.8 244.7 140.0 507.2 381.4 262.7 125.8 28.6 97.2 1,190.1 939.6 1,125.9 2022 Feb.
322.3 390.0 245.2 144.8 510.4 379.5 259.4 130.9 29.0 101.9 1,169.2 921.9 1,249.9 Mar.
322.5 382.9 246.5 136.4 505.4 378.8 257.8 126.7 32.2 94.4 1,174.5 926.0 1,496.5 Apr.
322.7 382.1 244.5 137.7 510.9 383.7 260.7 127.1 31.4 95.7 1,166.1 917.3 1,458.8 May
320.9 379.9 244.9 135.0 524.9 388.1 268.4 136.8 33.2 103.6 1,182.4 925.1 1,603.8 June
334.3 380.3 245.8 134.5 520.2 383.8 266.0 136.4 33.4 103.0 1,199.9 941.5 1,411.5 July
333.3 374.8 243.4 131.4 516.2 387.1 268.6 129.1 33.7 95.4 1,211.7 952.6 1,670.0 Aug.
333.9 372.2 244.5 127.7 522.4 390.5 273.1 132.0 35.4 96.6 1,220.9 961.0 1,973.8 Sep.
333.8 378.1 246.0 132.1 513.3 385.7 268.4 127.6 34.4 93.2 1,234.2 975.7 1,930.8 Oct.
335.9 374.2 246.3 127.9 521.1 394.0 276.5 127.1 32.7 94.4 1,224.6 963.4 1,728.1 Nov.
337.5 376.4 248.0 128.4 505.3 384.9 270.2 120.4 30.8 89.6 1,137.2 882.9 1,841.0 Dec.
333.8 374.0 250.3 123.7 520.1 393.5 280.2 126.6 30.2 96.4 1,161.9 904.0 1,719.2 2023 Jan.
333.5 379.5 248.2 131.3 520.0 393.3 279.2 126.8 31.3 95.4 1,167.6 904.4 1,875.3 Feb.
332.2 376.5 248.9 127.6 526.0 397.5 275.7 128.4 30.9 97.5 1,168.5 902.6 1,705.4 Mar.
331.2 375.1 250.9 124.2 533.7 405.8 280.9 128.0 32.3 95.7 1,149.9 883.9 1,717.3 Apr.
332.1 370.5 249.8 120.7 538.7 407.7 284.6 131.0 31.9 99.1 1,177.7 912.0 1,724.4 May
337.4 373.4 248.7 124.7 538.7 403.1 279.6 135.6 31.0 104.5 1,150.6 886.7 1,795.7 June
336.2 376.4 252.1 124.3 536.6 407.3 282.8 129.3 30.7 98.7 1,156.3 895.0 1,916.3 July
333.3 377.9 249.5 128.4 537.7 404.5 282.9 133.2 31.1 102.1 1,157.7 899.2 1,915.9 Aug.
334.1 377.4 252.0 125.4 536.7 404.7 282.5 132.0 32.0 100.0 1,163.8 902.7 1,989.5 Sep.
334.7 380.5 255.1 125.4 537.0 405.6 282.9 131.4 32.0 99.4 1,165.8 909.5 1,980.1 Oct.
334.0 382.2 254.4 127.8 543.2 412.1 288.2 131.1 30.9 100.2 1,153.0 895.0 1,787.0 Nov.
Changes 3
15.5 –12.3 –15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 – 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
11.5 – 3.9 – 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 – 3.7 – 1.0 – 2.8 –88.3 –101.0 –150.1 2015
7.8 –35.4 –12.1 –23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 – 4.2 – 0.9 – 3.3 51.4 55.0 –51.4 2016
13.7 –51.3 –22.8 –28.5 –12.2 – 3.4 4.0 – 8.7 0.1 – 8.9 –12.3 – 6.7 –173.1 2017
– 9.8 –46.2 –19.1 –27.0 6.8 18.2 18.6 –11.4 – 1.5 – 9.9 29.0 18.9 14.8 2018
7.3 –17.7 – 8.6 – 9.1 31.3 29.5 26.9 1.7 0.0 1.7 –32.1 –33.3 330.3 2019
0.2 – 2.4 – 1.7 – 0.7 31.0 30.6 20.9 0.3 – 0.4 0.7 – 9.7 – 8.2 108.8 2020
17.8 –19.1 – 6.1 –13.1 21.1 35.5 22.6 –14.3 – 1.1 –13.2 71.7 84.9 –203.7 2021
16.9 –14.4 1.9 –16.3 19.3 20.7 24.4 – 1.4 2.6 – 3.9 15.0 – 0.8 793.3 2022
– 0.4 5.5 0.5 5.0 3.8 – 1.7 – 3.3 5.5 0.4 5.1 –22.2 –19.2 123.7 2022 Mar.
0.2 – 6.8 1.4 – 8.2 – 5.3 – 1.6 – 2.7 – 3.7 3.2 – 6.9 –13.8 –14.2 246.6 Apr.
0.3 – 0.4 – 2.0 1.6 6.2 5.4 3.3 0.8 – 0.8 1.7 – 1.0 – 2.0 –36.6 May
– 1.7 – 2.1 0.4 – 2.5 13.0 3.0 6.1 10.0 1.9 8.1 –10.0 –18.2 182.3 June
13.4 0.0 0.9 – 0.8 – 6.3 – 5.2 – 2.9 – 1.1 0.1 – 1.3 7.8 8.0 –193.2 July
– 1.0 – 5.1 – 2.3 – 2.8 – 3.3 3.4 2.5 – 6.7 0.4 – 7.0 7.2 6.5 258.9 Aug.
0.8 – 2.4 1.1 – 3.5 9.9 3.3 4.0 6.6 1.7 4.8 0.7 0.1 303.7 Sep.
– 0.3 5.9 1.4 4.4 – 8.7 – 4.4 – 4.6 – 4.3 – 1.0 – 3.3 19.7 20.4 –44.0 Oct.
2.0 – 4.1 0.0 – 4.1 8.4 9.2 9.6 – 0.8 – 1.7 0.9 8.8 4.8 –199.3 Nov.
1.8 1.5 0.9 0.6 –15.6 – 9.3 – 6.2 – 6.4 – 1.9 – 4.5 –75.0 –69.5 112.9 Dec.
0.1 – 1.6 2.3 – 3.9 16.3 9.4 10.0 6.9 – 0.6 7.5 33.4 27.8 –121.8 2023 Jan.
– 0.4 5.6 – 2.0 7.7 – 0.2 – 0.7 – 1.4 0.5 1.1 – 0.7 – 1.7 – 6.6 156.4 Feb.
– 1.2 – 3.0 0.8 – 3.7 6.1 4.6 – 3.0 1.5 – 0.4 1.9 9.6 6.5 –170.1 Mar.
– 1.0 – 1.2 2.1 – 3.3 8.0 8.5 5.4 – 0.5 1.4 – 1.9 –14.9 –15.4 11.9 Apr.
0.9 – 4.7 – 1.2 – 3.5 5.4 2.1 3.9 3.4 – 0.4 3.7 28.3 28.1 10.1 May
4.2 3.0 – 1.1 4.1 – 0.9 – 5.5 – 5.9 4.6 – 0.9 5.5 – 9.4 – 8.3 60.3 June
– 1.2 3.0 3.4 – 0.4 – 1.7 4.4 3.4 – 6.1 – 0.3 – 5.7 10.3 12.6 120.4 July
– 2.8 1.5 – 2.6 4.1 1.9 – 1.9 1.0 3.8 0.5 3.4 – 5.1 – 1.9 – 2.2 Aug.
0.7 – 0.3 2.6 – 2.9 – 0.7 0.4 – 0.3 – 1.1 0.9 – 2.0 6.6 3.7 71.3 Sep.
0.7 3.0 3.1 – 0.0 0.5 1.1 0.5 – 0.5 0.0 – 0.6 3.9 8.3 – 5.0 Oct.
– 0.8 1.0 – 1.3 2.3 5.9 6.2 5.4 – 0.3 – 1.2 0.9 –13.1 –14.5 –193.6 Nov.
of equalisation claims.  3 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures
(see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
22•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Liabilities
€ billion
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area   Deposits of banks (MFIs)
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks 
of banks
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1 Totalin the
home
countryin other
Member
States Total Total 
Overnight Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Total 
Overnight
End of year or month 
2013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2018 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2019 8,311.0 1,242.8 1,010.4 232.4 3,778.1 3,649.8 2,230.9 843.7 261.7 575.1 540.5 116.3 54.6
2020 8,943.3 1,493.2 1,237.0 256.3 4,021.6 3,836.7 2,508.4 767.8 227.1 560.5 533.2 135.1 57.0
2021 9,172.2 1,628.6 1,338.6 289.9 4,129.9 3,931.8 2,649.3 721.3 203.9 561.2 537.1 153.8 70.7
2022 10,517.9 1,618.6 1,231.6 387.0 4,343.5 4,093.8 2,712.1 848.6 353.7 533.2 510.2 180.5 84.1
2022 Feb. 9,842.7 1,743.7 1,369.7 374.0 4,209.7 3,993.9 2,699.7 733.4 217.5 560.8 537.7 169.3 90.1
Mar. 9,962.9 1,737.5 1,367.8 369.8 4,212.3 3,990.1 2,690.3 740.9 226.7 559.0 536.1 177.7 99.4
Apr. 10,268.8 1,766.8 1,384.4 382.3 4,223.7 4,003.6 2,700.1 745.6 234.6 557.9 535.2 175.5 93.4
May 10,258.0 1,765.9 1,393.7 372.2 4,236.1 4,013.3 2,718.3 738.4 229.4 556.5 534.0 176.2 97.1
June 10,428.9 1,744.4 1,384.7 359.7 4,235.0 4,008.2 2,708.8 744.7 238.3 554.7 532.4 180.5 102.7
July 10,267.9 1,772.1 1,383.3 388.9 4,267.6 4,041.3 2,722.8 765.6 259.2 552.9 530.7 179.5 99.0
Aug. 10,627.2 1,785.7 1,403.5 382.2 4,322.0 4,089.0 2,760.7 777.8 272.2 550.5 528.3 185.0 103.0
Sep. 11,063.0 1,814.5 1,415.7 398.8 4,342.6 4,105.7 2,748.5 812.0 306.6 545.2 523.1 191.1 102.4
Oct. 11,036.0 1,837.4 1,419.0 418.4 4,359.6 4,122.0 2,741.6 838.3 334.6 542.1 519.8 190.0 92.4
Nov. 10,762.4 1,773.7 1,345.0 428.7 4,401.0 4,132.6 2,752.4 843.3 344.7 536.8 514.3 193.1 97.3
Dec. 10,517.9 1,618.6 1,231.6 387.0 4,343.5 4,093.8 2,712.1 848.6 353.7 533.2 510.2 180.5 84.1
2023 Jan. 10,585.0 1,642.4 1,231.2 411.2 4,392.0 4,124.2 2,706.4 895.1 397.6 522.7 498.8 188.7 94.3
Feb. 10,760.9 1,633.5 1,226.0 407.5 4,391.4 4,113.2 2,670.6 926.7 428.4 515.9 490.8 191.2 97.2
Mar. 10,553.8 1,618.0 1,210.4 407.6 4,368.3 4,092.1 2,625.3 959.7 462.3 507.2 480.5 197.9 98.8
Apr. 10,564.3 1,632.8 1,227.7 405.1 4,370.1 4,099.8 2,620.9 980.3 482.3 498.6 470.4 199.5 93.6
May 10,653.7 1,622.7 1,229.8 392.9 4,384.2 4,108.2 2,613.0 1,004.7 504.1 490.6 460.2 201.6 97.9
June 10,577.7 1,530.6 1,149.6 381.0 4,378.1 4,110.1 2,586.3 1,040.5 541.1 483.3 450.2 196.6 90.9
July 10,743.2 1,563.0 1,159.8 403.2 4,382.4 4,116.2 2,569.6 1,070.7 572.0 475.9 439.9 197.0 90.2
Aug. 10,735.3 1,549.2 1,162.1 387.0 4,388.3 4,124.6 2,555.7 1,101.4 603.4 467.5 428.7 191.6 87.5
Sep. 10,737.5 1,500.0 1,112.7 387.3 4,384.5 4,126.8 2,545.8 1,119.2 620.4 461.8 420.1 193.4 89.5
Oct. 10,797.9 1,530.0 1,132.1 398.0 4,398.0 4,135.1 2,528.3 1,151.4 653.5 455.4 410.8 198.1 88.2
Nov. 10,610.0 1,547.0 1,136.5 410.6 4,414.1 4,158.1 2,538.2 1,171.5 670.5 448.3 400.3 196.9 89.8
Changes 4
2014 206.8 –28.4 –32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 –32.1 3.1 – 2.4 – 2.4 – 2.5 – 0.0
2015 –191.4 –62.1 –50.3 –11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 –37.0 –10.1 –11.3 4.2 – 0.4 – 0.3
2016 184.3 –31.6 – 2.2 –29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 –11.1 1.4 – 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.9
2017 8.0 30.6 14.8 15.8 124.2 107.7 145.8 –32.5 –15.3 – 5.6 1.5 16.4 5.8
2018 101.8 –20.1 –25.7 5.6 112.4 114.7 137.7 –18.8 – 6.5 – 4.3 1.2 – 4.3 2.3
2019 483.4 12.6 –10.0 22.6 132.1 120.0 154.1 –30.6 – 6.6 – 3.4 – 0.6 10.6 8.7
2020 769.5 340.0 317.0 23.0 244.9 188.4 277.6 –74.7 –34.9 –14.5 – 7.2 18.7 1.8
2021 207.2 133.4 103.4 30.0 107.3 96.2 141.4 –45.8 –23.3 0.6 3.9 16.6 13.6
2022 1,170.5 –15.6 –105.9 90.3 208.9 165.9 60.6 132.8 148.1 –27.5 –26.3 18.4 12.8
2022 Mar. 119.7 – 6.6 – 2.1 – 4.5 2.2 – 4.2 – 9.7 7.3 9.2 – 1.8 – 1.6 8.3 9.3
Apr. 283.1 25.1 15.6 9.5 8.0 11.0 7.5 4.1 7.2 – 0.6 – 0.4 – 3.1 – 6.6
May 1.1 0.7 9.8 – 9.1 13.6 10.6 18.9 – 6.9 – 5.0 – 1.3 – 1.2 1.0 3.9
June 178.6 –24.2 – 9.7 –14.5 – 2.8 – 6.6 –10.7 5.9 8.5 – 1.8 – 1.6 4.1 5.6
July –177.9 24.6 – 1.6 26.2 29.3 30.8 13.0 19.6 19.9 – 1.8 – 1.7 – 2.0 – 3.9
Aug. 359.0 15.5 23.0 – 7.5 53.6 47.1 37.2 12.4 12.9 – 2.4 – 2.4 5.3 3.8
Sep. 428.4 25.2 11.7 13.5 19.0 15.4 –13.3 34.0 34.1 – 5.3 – 5.3 5.6 – 0.9
Oct. –19.3 24.2 3.8 20.3 17.2 16.2 – 7.3 26.6 28.2 – 3.1 – 3.3 – 0.7 – 9.7
Nov. –245.9 –60.3 –73.0 12.7 45.6 21.3 14.3 12.2 10.1 – 5.3 – 5.4 – 3.2 5.4
Dec. –225.1 –152.7 –112.7 –40.0 –55.4 –37.3 –39.2 5.6 9.4 – 3.7 – 4.1 –11.9 –12.8
2023 Jan. 87.5 23.3 0.0 23.3 49.1 30.9 –10.4 46.7 44.0 – 5.5 – 6.4 8.2 10.1
Feb. 167.0 –10.3 – 5.6 – 4.7 – 1.8 –11.8 –36.4 31.3 30.7 – 6.7 – 7.9 2.1 2.7
Mar. –195.2 –13.4 –14.7 1.3 –21.7 –20.0 –44.1 32.8 33.5 – 8.7 –10.3 7.1 1.8
Apr. 16.7 15.5 17.5 – 1.9 2.4 8.1 – 4.1 20.8 20.2 – 8.6 –10.1 1.8 – 5.1
May 91.9 –10.1 2.1 –12.1 13.1 8.4 – 7.9 24.3 21.7 – 8.0 –10.2 1.1 4.2
June –65.9 –90.3 –79.4 –11.0 – 6.3 1.5 –26.3 35.0 36.1 – 7.3 – 9.9 – 4.7 – 6.9
July 170.6 31.5 10.4 21.1 4.9 6.5 –16.4 30.2 31.0 – 7.3 –10.3 0.6 – 0.7
Aug. –15.1 –13.3 2.8 –16.1 6.4 7.9 –13.6 30.0 30.7 – 8.5 –11.2 – 4.4 – 2.4
Sep. 1.6 –49.2 –49.4 0.2 – 3.9 2.2 – 9.9 17.8 17.3 – 5.7 – 8.6 1.8 1.9
Oct. 68.3 30.9 19.9 11.0 13.8 8.5 –17.4 32.3 33.1 – 6.4 – 9.4 4.7 – 1.2
Nov. –188.9 17.1 4.5 12.6 16.0 23.0 10.0 20.1 16.9 – 7.1 –10.5 – 1.2 1.9
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.
1 See footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Excluding deposits of central governments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
23•
IV. Banks
  Debt securities issued  3
in other Member States  2 Deposits of
central governments
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Totalof which:
domestic
central
govern-
mentsLiabilities
arising
from
repos with
non-banks
in the
euro areaMoney
market
fund
shares
issued  3 Totalof which:
with
maturities
of up to
2 years  3Liabilities
to non-
euro 
area
residentsCapital
and
reservesOther
Liabilities  1 Period
End of year or month
44.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 2013
42.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 2016
63.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 2017
56.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7 2018
59.0 16.5 2.7 2.4 12.0 11.2 1.5 1.9 1,063.2 32.3 559.4 728.6 935.6 2019
75.6 30.6 2.6 2.3 49.8 48.6 9.4 2.5 1,056.9 21.2 617.6 710.8 1,031.3 2020
80.7 22.8 2.4 2.2 44.2 43.5 2.2 2.3 1,110.8 27.5 757.2 732.3 809.0 2021
94.3 32.4 2.2 2.0 69.2 66.8 3.4 2.7 1,185.1 40.8 800.4 747.2 1,817.1 2022
76.8 19.8 2.4 2.2 46.4 42.8 2.4 2.4 1,141.1 26.2 945.9 717.7 1,080.0 2022 Feb.
75.9 19.0 2.4 2.2 44.5 42.1 2.8 2.5 1,148.9 25.9 926.4 736.8 1,195.6 Mar.
79.8 22.5 2.4 2.2 44.6 42.2 2.3 2.3 1,161.1 26.3 939.2 734.6 1,438.9 Apr.
76.8 19.9 2.3 2.1 46.6 42.8 1.9 2.5 1,164.1 27.7 958.5 732.3 1,396.8 May
75.5 19.1 2.3 2.1 46.2 43.0 2.0 2.5 1,164.7 32.2 945.7 752.0 1,582.6 June
78.1 23.2 2.3 2.1 46.8 44.0 4.2 2.5 1,177.1 35.9 926.6 743.6 1,374.2 July
79.7 24.3 2.3 2.1 47.9 44.0 4.8 2.4 1,183.7 38.6 950.2 741.8 1,636.6 Aug.
86.4 31.2 2.3 2.1 45.9 43.3 3.2 2.5 1,203.3 45.8 987.2 758.0 1,951.6 Sep.
95.4 39.7 2.2 2.1 47.6 44.9 4.0 2.6 1,202.6 39.4 980.8 751.8 1,897.2 Oct.
93.5 31.3 2.2 2.0 75.4 71.1 4.7 2.6 1,202.3 42.2 939.7 747.3 1,691.1 Nov.
94.3 32.4 2.2 2.0 69.2 66.8 3.4 2.7 1,185.1 40.8 800.4 747.2 1,817.1 Dec.
92.3 30.4 2.2 2.0 79.1 73.8 3.9 2.5 1,205.2 47.4 890.6 728.9 1,719.6 2023 Jan.
91.8 30.0 2.2 1.9 87.0 82.5 5.0 2.4 1,221.5 55.6 901.8 724.9 1,880.4 Feb.
97.0 28.5 2.1 1.9 78.2 73.3 4.7 2.6 1,231.2 64.6 863.1 734.8 1,731.0 Mar.
103.7 33.9 2.1 1.9 70.8 65.9 5.4 2.8 1,235.3 67.3 856.2 735.7 1,726.0 Apr.
101.6 30.7 2.1 1.8 74.4 62.4 6.0 2.6 1,257.3 72.3 888.2 746.9 1,745.8 May
103.6 32.5 2.0 1.8 71.4 64.0 4.8 2.6 1,253.9 75.7 853.4 749.6 1,804.7 June
104.8 33.2 2.0 1.7 69.2 61.5 6.5 2.9 1,262.0 76.3 855.0 757.2 1,914.3 July
102.0 32.4 2.0 1.7 72.2 61.5 5.8 3.0 1,271.3 83.5 840.0 765.2 1,912.5 Aug.
102.0 32.6 2.0 1.7 64.3 60.0 4.9 3.0 1,280.7 82.6 825.8 765.1 1,973.5 Sep.
107.9 37.8 2.0 1.6 64.8 59.7 6.2 2.9 1,288.5 84.7 843.9 755.9 1,972.3 Oct.
105.1 34.5 2.0 1.6 59.1 55.1 6.6 3.0 1,286.4 83.7 805.1 768.7 1,779.0 Nov.
Changes 4
– 2.3 – 1.2 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 6.4 – 4.8 – 3.4 – 0.6 –63.7 – 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.3 2014
– 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 – 0.4 – 1.9 – 1.0 – 0.0 –86.8 7.7 –30.3 28.0 –143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 2.2 – 1.2 – 0.3 – 1.1 8.6 – 1.3 116.1 26.4 –39.5 2016
10.8 4.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.1 – 0.3 – 3.3 – 8.5 –16.1 34.1 –162.3 2017
– 6.4 – 4.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 2.1 2.1 – 2.6 0.3 30.0 – 5.9 –36.0 7.4 10.3 2018
2.0 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.1 1.4 1.4 5.6 – 0.5 22.3 0.1 –47.9 30.0 329.1 2019
17.0 14.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 37.8 37.3 3.6 0.6 11.8 – 9.3 61.6 – 1.5 108.5 2020
3.1 – 8.0 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 5.5 – 5.0 – 7.9 0.3 40.6 6.9 124.9 16.6 –207.9 2021
5.8 8.5 – 0.3 – 0.2 24.6 23.0 1.2 0.4 67.2 12.6 45.6 5.0 857.7 2022
– 1.0 – 0.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.0 – 0.6 0.3 0.2 6.9 – 0.3 –20.7 19.0 118.4 2022 Mar.
3.6 3.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.1 0.0 – 0.5 – 0.3 3.4 0.2 0.4 – 5.8 252.8 Apr.
– 2.9 – 2.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 2.0 0.6 – 0.4 0.2 6.4 1.4 23.9 – 1.0 –42.4 May
– 1.5 – 1.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.4 0.2 0.1 – 0.0 – 4.8 4.3 – 6.3 17.6 199.0 June
1.9 3.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.5 1.1 2.1 0.1 9.1 3.5 –24.8 –10.5 –207.8 July
1.6 1.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.1 0.0 0.6 – 0.1 4.1 2.7 20.1 – 3.1 268.3 Aug.
6.5 6.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.0 – 0.7 – 1.6 0.1 15.8 7.0 31.8 14.9 323.1 Sep.
9.1 8.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.7 1.6 0.8 0.1 1.8 – 6.3 – 2.8 – 5.3 –55.3 Oct.
– 8.6 – 8.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 27.5 25.8 0.8 0.0 7.4 2.4 –29.9 – 1.1 –208.4 Nov.
1.0 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 6.3 – 4.3 – 1.3 0.1 –11.5 – 1.2 –132.1 1.9 125.9 Dec.
– 1.9 – 1.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 9.9 6.9 0.5 – 0.2 22.4 6.6 95.0 –17.6 –85.0 2023 Jan.
– 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 7.9 8.7 1.2 – 0.1 13.0 8.1 6.9 – 5.0 163.2 Feb.
5.3 – 1.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 8.8 – 9.2 – 0.3 0.3 13.6 9.2 –33.8 11.2 –151.2 Mar.
6.9 5.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 7.4 – 7.4 0.7 0.1 5.7 2.7 – 4.9 1.8 – 4.7 Apr.
– 3.1 – 3.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 3.6 – 3.5 0.6 – 0.1 23.4 6.5 32.0 9.4 23.5 May
2.1 2.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 3.0 1.6 – 1.1 – 0.0 0.4 4.1 –28.3 3.6 56.2 June
1.2 0.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.1 – 2.5 1.7 0.3 10.2 0.7 4.2 8.1 109.7 July
– 2.1 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 2.9 – 0.0 – 0.7 0.1 7.0 7.1 –18.9 7.2 – 2.8 Aug.
– 0.1 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 7.9 – 1.5 – 0.9 0.1 10.3 0.0 –14.2 – 1.0 60.4 Sep.
5.9 5.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.6 – 0.3 1.4 – 0.1 8.3 2.2 19.1 – 4.6 – 0.4 Oct.
– 3.1 – 3.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 5.7 – 4.6 0.4 0.1 – 3.0 – 1.9 –38.8 13.6 –194.4 Nov.
3 In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money
market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published togetherwith money market fund shares.  4 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
24•
IV. Banks
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Loans
End of
monthNumber of
reporting
institu-
tionsBalance
sheet
total  1Cash in
hand and
credit
balances
with
central
banks TotalBalances
and
loansSecurities
issued by
banks Totalfor
up to and
including
1 yearfor
more than
1 year BillsSecurities
issued by
non-banksPartici-
pating
interestsOther
assets  1
All categories of banks
2023 June 1,375 10,639.8 70.5 3,543.4 3,053.2 485.6 5,003.9 478.6 3,795.4 0.2 711.0 97.4 1,924.6
July 1,370 10,805.6 87.6 3,563.9 3,073.6 485.0 5,011.3 486.5 3,804.7 0.1 700.4 97.3 2,045.4
Aug. 1,361 10,797.6 64.9 3,589.1 3,099.2 485.0 5,001.5 468.1 3,812.6 0.1 702.0 96.6 2,045.6
Sep. 1,353 10,799.9 68.2 3,508.2 3,022.6 481.1 5,006.9 477.4 3,809.0 0.1 700.8 96.7 2,119.9
Oct. 1,346 10,860.6 80.2 3,563.9 3,078.6 480.9 5,008.8 479.2 3,813.1 0.1 698.8 97.0 2,110.7
Nov. 1,334 10,674.4 62.9 3,566.2 3,076.8 485.1 5,029.2 482.3 3,824.2 0.1 704.1 97.2 1,919.0
Commercial banks 6
2023 Oct. 240 5,131.9 34.0 1,696.5 1,609.5 86.6 1,620.6 319.8 1,044.4 0.1 247.6 31.2 1,749.6
Nov. 240 4,951.7 21.1 1,688.7 1,600.8 87.7 1,635.6 325.4 1,049.0 0.1 253.6 31.2 1,575.1
Big banks 7
2023 Oct. 3 2,600.9 23.2 684.3 650.8 33.5 750.6 163.3 452.2 0.0 130.5 25.3 1,117.6
Nov. 3 2,489.9 9.8 697.6 664.1 33.5 758.1 165.1 452.2 0.0 137.1 25.3 999.1
Regional banks and other commercial banks
2023 Oct. 131 2,034.2 7.9 686.4 636.3 49.7 719.2 109.6 498.6 0.1 107.9 4.3 616.4
Nov. 131 1,957.1 8.1 658.6 607.6 50.7 725.8 112.7 502.9 0.1 107.3 4.3 560.5
Branches of foreign banks
2023 Oct. 106 496.7 2.9 325.8 322.4 3.4 150.8 46.9 93.6 – 9.2 1.6 15.7
Nov. 106 504.7 3.3 332.5 329.2 3.4 151.7 47.6 93.9 – 9.2 1.6 15.6
Landesbanken
2023 Oct. 6 925.9 9.7 348.0 294.7 52.4 429.1 42.9 344.9 0.0 36.1 9.6 129.5
Nov. 6 909.2 2.4 346.3 292.1 53.2 428.5 42.5 345.6 0.0 35.0 9.5 122.6
Savings banks
2023 Oct. 354 1,547.7 19.5 267.4 150.4 117.0 1,219.2 54.7 997.9 – 166.3 16.4 25.3
Nov. 354 1,557.8 20.6 276.3 158.7 117.6 1,218.7 53.4 999.7 – 165.4 16.4 25.8
Credit cooperatives
2023 Oct. 705 1,163.0 10.9 210.1 101.9 108.1 890.1 34.4 737.2 0.0 118.5 20.1 31.8
Nov. 694 1,170.6 13.3 212.2 103.8 108.2 892.5 34.9 739.4 0.0 118.3 20.1 32.4
Mortgage banks
2023 Oct. 7 223.2 0.1 17.2 10.6 6.6 200.3 3.3 182.5 – 14.4 0.1 5.5
Nov. 7 225.9 0.1 19.5 13.0 6.6 200.4 3.3 182.8 – 14.3 0.1 5.7
Building and loan associations
2023 Oct. 16 258.4 0.1 41.1 25.3 15.8 212.9 1.2 189.8 . 22.0 0.3 4.0
Nov. 15 258.8 0.1 41.1 25.4 15.7 213.4 1.2 190.3 . 21.9 0.3 4.0
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2023 Oct. 18 1,610.5 5.8 983.6 886.2 94.5 436.6 22.9 316.5 – 93.9 19.5 165.0
Nov. 18 1,600.4 5.1 982.1 883.1 96.1 440.1 21.7 317.5 0.0 95.7 19.6 153.5
Memo item:    Foreign banks 8
2023 Oct. 137 2,558.5 8.0 879.7 843.1 36.2 690.9 144.0 420.0 0.1 121.0 3.5 976.4
Nov. 137 2,455.1 9.1 857.5 820.3 36.9 699.4 149.2 423.1 0.1 121.3 3.5 885.6
of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2023 Oct. 31 2,061.8 5.1 554.0 520.7 32.8 540.1 97.1 326.5 0.1 111.8 1.9 960.7
Nov. 31 1,950.4 5.8 524.9 491.2 33.6 547.8 101.7 329.2 0.1 112.2 1.9 870.0
* Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified as
MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3.  1 Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative financial
instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the meaning ofSection 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handelsgesetzbuch) read
in conjunction with Section 35 (1) number 1a of the Credit Institution Accounting
Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute) are classified
under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting date. Trading
portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Series Banking statistics, in
Tables I.1 to I.3.  2 For building and loan associations: including deposits under savings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
25•
IV. Banks
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4
TotalSight
depositsTime
deposits TotalSight
depositsfor
up to and
including
1 yearfor
more
than
1 year  2Memo
item:
Liabilities
arising
from
repos  3 Totalof which:
At 3
months'
noticeBank
savings
bondsBearer
debt
securities
out-
standing  5Capital
including
published
reserves,
partici-
pation
rights
capital,
funds for
general
banking
risksOther
liabi-
lities  1End of
month
All categories of banks
2,175.4 699.0 1,476.4 4,587.8 2,806.5 548.2 672.4 73.8 488.1 454.5 72.6 1,332.1 608.1 1,936.3 2023 June
2,212.3 717.1 1,495.1 4,591.2 2,786.2 572.0 672.6 81.2 480.7 444.1 79.7 1,335.1 610.3 2,056.7 July
2,184.0 705.0 1,479.0 4,596.2 2,766.9 597.8 667.8 78.9 472.2 432.8 91.4 1,346.6 610.8 2,060.0 Aug.
2,118.8 674.3 1,444.5 4,593.2 2,764.3 593.6 671.1 80.8 466.5 424.2 97.8 1,351.5 611.6 2,124.8 Sep.
2,153.9 695.6 1,458.2 4,621.2 2,751.6 624.0 673.2 88.2 460.1 414.7 112.4 1,351.7 611.8 2,122.0 Oct.
2,140.2 677.8 1,462.3 4,629.8 2,759.2 609.7 676.7 84.7 452.9 404.1 131.3 1,359.8 611.1 1,933.5 Nov.
Commercial banks 6
1,139.3 542.6 596.6 1,894.6 1,199.5 333.3 242.5 86.3 85.8 66.0 33.4 204.5 213.1 1,680.4 2023 Oct.
1,122.2 522.0 600.2 1,898.7 1,205.1 321.7 243.2 82.8 85.8 63.9 42.8 205.1 212.3 1,513.4 Nov.
Big banks 7
423.7 181.5 242.2 882.5 532.5 196.2 73.3 49.0 76.4 57.4 4.1 152.5 79.7 1,062.6 2023 Oct.
422.1 181.8 240.3 881.4 538.1 190.2 72.5 46.6 76.7 55.6 4.0 151.9 79.6 954.9 Nov.
Regional banks and other commercial banks
466.0 234.0 232.0 801.6 524.6 90.5 148.1 37.3 9.2 8.4 29.3 50.5 116.3 599.7 2023 Oct.
448.8 218.0 230.7 800.8 519.5 84.4 149.3 36.3 8.9 8.1 38.7 51.8 115.8 540.0 Nov.
Branches of foreign banks
249.6 127.1 122.5 210.5 142.4 46.7 21.1 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.1 1.5 17.1 18.1 2023 Oct.
251.3 122.1 129.1 216.5 147.6 47.1 21.5 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.1 1.4 17.0 18.4 Nov.
Landesbanken
224.6 37.5 187.1 302.6 145.4 79.6 71.7 1.1 4.5 4.5 1.4 215.2 43.1 140.3 2023 Oct.
226.4 40.2 186.2 295.7 146.4 72.2 71.0 1.0 4.5 4.4 1.7 215.8 43.1 128.2 Nov.
Savings banks
172.0 5.3 166.6 1,154.8 776.5 77.4 16.6 – 225.5 208.1 58.8 21.3 141.1 58.5 2023 Oct.
171.1 4.7 166.4 1,165.4 780.5 80.3 17.3 – 220.9 202.7 66.4 21.4 141.1 58.8 Nov.
Credit cooperatives
161.4 3.8 157.6 848.6 552.5 100.9 33.0 – 143.8 135.8 18.4 8.1 105.3 39.6 2023 Oct.
161.8 3.6 158.1 854.6 550.4 107.0 35.8 – 141.3 132.6 20.0 8.7 105.4 40.1 Nov.
Mortgage banks
44.6 3.6 40.9 54.5 2.5 6.3 45.8 0.6 – – . 107.6 8.9 7.6 2023 Oct.
45.5 3.4 42.1 54.2 2.6 5.7 45.9 0.6 – – . 109.5 8.9 7.8 Nov.
Building and loan associations
37.3 3.1 34.2 193.2 3.4 2.3 186.9 – 0.4 0.4 0.1 6.1 13.0 8.9 2023 Oct.
37.4 3.4 34.0 192.9 3.5 2.4 186.5 – 0.4 0.4 0.1 6.6 13.0 8.9 Nov.
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
374.7 99.6 275.1 172.9 71.7 24.0 76.8 0.2 – – . 788.9 87.3 186.7 2023 Oct.
375.8 100.5 275.3 168.3 70.6 20.3 77.0 0.3 – – . 792.6 87.3 176.4 Nov.
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
677.5 361.8 315.6 768.7 495.8 141.6 103.8 43.1 10.0 9.6 17.5 50.1 100.6 961.7 2023 Oct.
659.8 341.3 318.5 774.3 503.1 133.7 105.2 41.4 9.7 9.3 22.5 51.2 100.6 869.3 Nov.
of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
427.9 234.7 193.2 558.2 353.4 94.9 82.7 43.1 9.8 9.3 17.4 48.6 83.6 943.6 2023 Oct.
408.5 219.2 189.3 557.8 355.5 86.6 83.7 41.4 9.5 9.0 22.4 49.7 83.6 850.8 Nov.
and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  3 Included in time deposits.  4 Excluding deposits
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2).  5 Including subordinated
negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
6 Commercial banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other
commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign banks”.  7 Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner
Bank AG (up to Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische
Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG), Deutsche Postbank AG (from December 2004 up to April2018) and DB Privat- und Firmenkundenbank AG (from May 2018) (see the explanatory
notes in the Statistical Series Banking statistics, Table I.3, banking group “Big banks “).
8 Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in other categories
of banks and the category ”Branches (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”.
9 Separate presentation of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks included in
other banking categories.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
26•
IV. Banks
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
PeriodCash in
hand
(euro area
banknotes
and
coins)Credit
balances
with the
Bundes-
bank TotalCredit
balances
and loans BillsNegotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
banksSecurities
issued by
banksMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total Loans BillsTreasury
bills and
negotiable
money mar-
ket paper
issued by
non-banksSecurities
issued
by non-
banks  1
End of year or month *
2013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2017 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
2018 40.4 416.1 1,323.5 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 239.0 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.9
2019 43.2 476.6 1,254.7 1,016.2 0.0 0.7 237.9 4.5 3,521.5 3,119.2 0.3 3.3 398.7
2020 47.2 792.9 1,367.9 1,119.7 0.0 0.7 247.5 8.8 3,647.0 3,245.1 0.2 4.0 397.7
2021 49.4 905.0 1,409.6 1,163.7 – 0.5 245.3 10.3 3,798.1 3,392.4 0.3 2.6 402.8
2022 19.8 67.3 2,347.0 2,101.4 – 1.0 244.6 12.1 4,015.6 3,613.1 0.2 2.7 399.6
2022 June 51.1 1,090.9 1,462.8 1,214.8 – 0.8 247.2 9.8 3,906.6 3,513.4 0.2 3.7 389.3
July 41.6 1,084.2 1,454.9 1,206.8 – 0.8 247.2 9.8 3,945.0 3,539.1 0.2 3.6 402.2
Aug. 23.1 1,126.7 1,480.7 1,232.0 – 1.3 247.5 9.9 3,976.0 3,574.3 0.1 3.9 397.7
Sep. 20.4 122.4 2,573.9 2,319.2 – 1.4 253.2 9.8 3,993.6 3,595.3 0.2 3.6 394.5
Oct. 19.7 86.6 2,592.3 2,337.0 – 1.5 253.7 10.0 4,014.1 3,611.6 0.2 4.3 398.0
Nov. 18.8 88.4 2,524.4 2,271.2 – 1.5 251.7 11.1 4,025.7 3,625.3 0.2 3.6 396.7
Dec. 19.8 67.3 2,347.0 2,101.4 – 1.0 244.6 12.1 4,015.6 3,613.1 0.2 2.7 399.6
2023 Jan. 18.0 89.5 2,443.6 2,198.1 – 1.0 244.5 12.7 4,016.2 3,622.4 0.1 4.3 389.4
Feb. 17.8 52.2 2,471.9 2,222.2 – 1.0 248.8 12.8 4,030.2 3,629.4 0.1 2.9 397.9
Mar. 17.7 53.5 2,426.8 2,175.1 – 1.0 250.7 12.6 4,030.5 3,634.7 0.1 4.3 391.4
Apr. 18.7 54.2 2,434.7 2,182.3 – 1.1 251.3 12.7 4,032.5 3,641.2 0.1 3.2 388.1
May 18.1 48.7 2,483.6 2,230.4 – 0.8 252.4 12.7 4,039.0 3,650.5 0.1 2.2 386.2
June 17.5 51.6 2,366.1 2,114.1 – 0.9 251.0 12.7 4,042.1 3,645.6 0.1 2.9 393.5
July 17.0 69.9 2,369.8 2,118.4 – 1.1 250.3 12.8 4,048.7 3,653.9 0.1 3.2 391.6
Aug. 17.3 46.7 2,392.0 2,139.7 – 1.2 251.1 12.9 4,046.7 3,649.9 0.1 2.5 394.2
Sep. 17.9 49.6 2,305.0 2,056.1 – 1.0 247.8 12.9 4,048.1 3,653.5 0.1 3.4 391.1
Oct. 17.4 62.2 2,351.7 2,102.8 – 0.8 248.0 13.1 4,051.9 3,656.6 0.1 3.0 392.2
Nov. 16.7 45.5 2,375.9 2,122.3 – 0.9 252.7 13.3 4,057.9 3,661.2 0.1 3.1 393.6
Changes *
2014 +0.4 – 4.3 –119.3 – 87.1 +0.0 + 0.4 –32.6 +0.1 +36.7 +20.6 –0.1 – 0.6 +16.8
2015 +0.3 + 73.7 – 80.7 – 4.3 –0.0 – 0.4 –75.9 –0.1 +68.9 +54.1 –0.0 – 0.3 +15.1
2016 +6.5 +129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 – – 0.9 –17.9 +0.4 +43.7 +62.8 –0.1 – 0.1 –18.9
2017 +6.1 +108.4 + 50.3 + 70.4 –0.0 + 0.0 –20.1 –0.1 +57.0 +70.2 +0.0 + 0.4 –13.6
2018 +8.5 + 24.0 – 81.0 – 76.6 +0.0 + 0.1 – 4.4 +3.8 +71.5 +105.4 –0.1 – 0.5 –33.2
2019 +2.8 + 59.7 – 63.0 – 61.1 –0.0 – 0.2 – 1.6 –1.4 +126.7 +129.1 +0.1 + 3.1 – 5.5
2020 +4.1 +316.4 +201.2 +191.6 –0.0 + 0.0 + 9.6 +4.3 +123.2 +123.6 –0.1 + 0.7 – 1.0
2021 +2.2 +111.8 + 44.1 + 46.3 –0.0 – 0.2 – 2.0 +1.5 +152.2 +147.8 +0.0 – 2.2 + 6.6
2022 –29.6 –836.6 +938.0 +938.1 – + 0.2 – 0.3 +1.7 +216.7 +220.1 –0.1 + 0.1 – 3.3
2022 June +1.7 – 31.9 + 10.1 + 11.9 – + 0.1 – 1.9 –0.1 +19.9 +24.5 –0.0 + 0.5 – 5.1
July –9.5 – 6.8 – 7.5 – 7.6 – + 0.1 – 0.0 –0.1 +36.1 +23.5 +0.0 – 0.1 +12.7
Aug. –18.5 + 42.5 + 29.0 + 28.3 – + 0.2 + 0.5 +0.1 +30.9 +35.1 –0.0 + 0.3 – 4.5
Sep. –2.7 –1,004.3 +1,092.9 +1,087.0 – + 0.2 + 5.7 –0.0 +16.5 +19.9 +0.1 – 0.3 – 3.2
Oct. –0.7 – 35.8 + 18.5 + 17.8 – + 0.1 + 0.6 +0.2 +20.7 +16.6 –0.0 + 0.7 + 3.5
Nov. –0.8 + 1.8 – 67.6 – 65.5 – – 0.0 – 2.1 +1.1 +12.0 +13.9 –0.0 – 0.7 – 1.3
Dec. +1.0 – 19.9 –177.4 –169.9 – – 0.5 – 7.0 +1.0 – 9.6 –11.7 +0.0 – 0.9 + 2.9
2023 Jan. –1.8 + 22.2 + 96.7 + 96.7 – + 0.0 – 0.1 +0.6 + 0.6 + 9.2 –0.1 + 1.6 –10.3
Feb. –0.2 – 37.4 + 28.6 + 24.3 – + 0.0 + 4.3 +0.2 +13.3 + 6.3 –0.0 – 1.5 + 8.5
Mar. –0.1 + 1.3 – 45.1 – 47.0 – + 0.0 + 1.9 –0.1 + 0.9 + 6.0 +0.0 + 1.4 – 6.5
Apr. +1.0 + 0.7 + 7.8 + 7.2 – + 0.1 + 0.6 +0.1 + 2.1 + 6.5 +0.0 – 1.2 – 3.2
May –0.7 – 5.5 + 48.9 + 48.1 – – 0.3 + 1.1 –0.0 + 6.5 + 9.4 +0.0 – 1.0 – 1.9
June –0.5 + 2.9 –116.9 –115.7 – + 0.1 – 1.3 +0.0 + 4.4 – 3.7 –0.0 + 0.7 + 7.4
July –0.5 + 18.4 + 3.7 + 4.3 – + 0.2 – 0.8 +0.1 + 6.6 + 8.3 –0.0 + 0.2 – 1.9
Aug. +0.3 – 23.2 + 22.2 + 21.3 – + 0.1 + 0.8 +0.1 – 1.9 – 4.0 +0.0 – 0.6 + 2.7
Sep. +0.6 + 2.8 – 87.0 – 83.6 – – 0.2 – 3.3 +0.1 + 1.3 + 3.7 +0.0 + 0.9 – 3.2
Oct. –0.5 + 12.7 + 46.8 + 46.8 – – 0.2 + 0.2 +0.2 + 3.7 + 3.0 –0.0 – 0.4 + 1.1
Nov. –0.6 – 16.7 + 24.2 + 19.5 – + 0.1 + 4.6 +0.1 + 6.1 + 4.7 +0.0 + 0.1 + 1.3
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange ofequalisation claims (see also footnote 2).  2 Including debt securities arising from the
exchange of equalisation claims.  3 Including liabilities arising from registered debt
securities, registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities;

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
27•
IV. Banks
Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Equalisa-
tion
claims  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loansPartici-
pating
interests
in
domestic
banks
and
enterprises TotalSight
deposits
4Time
deposits
4Redis-
counted
bills  5Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
de-
positsTime
deposits
6Savings
de-
posits  7Bank
savings
bonds  8Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
– 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013
– 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
– 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
– 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016
– 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 2017
– 18.0 90.9 1,020.9 105.5 915.4 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9 2018
– 17.3 90.4 1,010.2 107.2 902.9 0.0 4.4 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 575.2 33.2 32.5 2019
– 23.5 78.3 1,236.7 125.0 1,111.6 0.0 13.1 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 560.6 28.3 34.4 2020
– 25.7 79.2 1,338.4 117.2 1,221.3 0.0 16.4 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 561.2 24.5 34.2 2021
– 25.6 80.3 1,231.6 136.9 1,094.7 0.0 15.7 4,162.0 2,720.6 873.5 533.2 34.6 35.9 2022
– 26.1 78.8 1,384.7 147.1 1,237.6 0.0 16.9 4,051.8 2,714.4 758.8 554.8 23.8 33.4 2022 June
– 25.9 80.3 1,383.3 134.3 1,249.0 0.0 16.6 4,086.4 2,729.0 780.4 553.0 24.1 33.0 July
– 25.9 79.8 1,403.5 136.0 1,267.5 – 16.5 4,134.3 2,766.8 792.0 550.6 25.0 33.0 Aug.
– 25.8 80.2 1,415.7 149.2 1,266.5 0.0 16.7 4,149.9 2,755.6 823.1 545.2 25.9 33.2 Sep.
– 25.8 80.4 1,419.0 138.1 1,280.9 0.0 16.1 4,168.4 2,748.7 849.3 542.2 28.1 33.6 Oct.
– 25.9 80.2 1,345.0 135.4 1,209.6 0.0 16.1 4,205.6 2,767.9 869.3 536.9 31.5 34.8 Nov.
– 25.6 80.3 1,231.6 136.9 1,094.7 0.0 15.7 4,162.0 2,720.6 873.5 533.2 34.6 35.9 Dec.
– 25.6 80.0 1,231.2 142.6 1,088.7 0.0 15.6 4,199.7 2,722.8 913.5 522.7 40.6 36.9 2023 Jan.
– 25.6 80.2 1,226.0 140.7 1,085.3 0.0 15.6 4,197.1 2,687.7 947.9 516.0 45.5 37.2 Feb.
– 24.6 80.3 1,210.4 137.0 1,073.4 0.0 15.2 4,167.4 2,639.8 968.6 507.2 51.7 36.4 Mar.
– 24.7 80.9 1,227.7 140.8 1,086.9 0.0 15.2 4,167.3 2,632.0 978.5 498.6 58.3 36.5 Apr.
– 24.7 81.1 1,229.8 137.8 1,091.9 0.0 15.1 4,172.9 2,623.9 993.0 490.6 65.4 36.6 May
– 24.4 81.2 1,149.6 134.0 1,015.6 0.0 14.6 4,176.3 2,600.9 1,020.0 483.3 72.1 36.5 June
– 24.4 81.0 1,159.8 134.8 1,025.0 0.0 14.6 4,180.2 2,582.2 1,042.9 475.9 79.1 36.7 July
– 24.4 80.3 1,162.1 138.5 1,023.7 0.0 14.5 4,188.4 2,568.4 1,061.7 467.5 90.7 36.9 Aug.
– 24.2 80.4 1,112.7 137.4 975.3 0.0 14.1 4,189.3 2,558.0 1,072.5 461.8 97.0 37.1 Sep.
– 24.1 80.3 1,132.1 136.7 995.4 0.0 14.0 4,198.0 2,544.5 1,086.5 455.4 111.6 37.3 Oct.
– 24.0 80.6 1,136.6 140.0 996.7 0.0 14.0 4,217.3 2,552.9 1,085.6 448.3 130.5 37.6 Nov.
Changes *
– –1.9 +2.0 –29.0 + 2.2 –31.2 –0.0 –0.6 +69.7 +107.9 –25.3 – 2.4 –10.6 –2.0 2014
– –2.1 –4.3 –46.6 + 3.3 –50.0 +0.0 –1.3 +106.5 +156.2 –28.3 –11.3 –10.1 –1.6 2015
– –1.3 +1.5 – 1.7 + 0.3 – 2.0 +0.0 –0.5 +104.7 +124.5 – 6.9 – 7.9 –5.0 –0.5 2016
– –0.0 –1.6 +11.0 –18.4 +29.4 –0.0 –0.5 +103.1 +142.8 –27.5 – 5.6 –6.7 +0.4 2017
– –1.0 +3.1 –25.0 – 3.1 –21.9 +0.0 –0.4 +117.7 +139.3 –10.8 – 4.3 –6.5 +3.9 2018
– –0.7 +0.1 – 8.6 + 1.6 –10.2 +0.0 –0.3 +122.5 +155.8 –25.7 – 3.4 –4.1 –1.4 2019
– +5.7 –3.3 +313.4 +23.2 +290.2 –0.0 +8.2 +221.6 +273.7 –32.7 –14.5 –4.9 +1.9 2020
– +2.3 +1.0 +105.2 – 7.4 +112.6 +0.0 +3.3 +95.3 +144.3 –46.2 + 0.7 –3.5 –0.2 2021
– –0.1 +1.7 –104.6 + 8.8 –113.4 –0.0 –0.6 +191.8 +65.8 +143.4 –27.5 +10.1 +1.7 2022
– –0.1 +0.2 – 9.0 + 4.4 –13.4 –0.0 –0.2 – 5.0 – 9.9 + 6.7 – 1.8 –0.0 –0.1 2022 June
– –0.2 +1.5 – 1.1 –12.4 +11.2 – –0.3 +33.5 +14.3 +20.7 – 1.8 +0.3 –0.5 July
– –0.0 +0.1 +23.3 + 1.8 +21.6 –0.0 –0.1 +48.1 +37.8 +11.8 – 2.4 +0.9 +0.0 Aug.
– –0.0 +0.4 +12.2 +13.2 – 0.9 +0.0 +0.1 +15.6 –11.4 +31.3 – 5.3 +0.9 +0.2 Sep.
– –0.0 +0.1 + 3.5 –10.9 +14.4 +0.0 –0.5 +17.4 – 8.0 +26.2 – 3.1 +2.2 +0.4 Oct.
– +0.1 –0.1 –73.9 – 2.6 –71.3 –0.0 –0.1 +45.3 +20.9 +26.3 – 5.3 +3.4 +1.3 Nov.
– –0.3 +0.1 –113.2 – 8.5 –104.7 –0.0 –0.4 –43.4 –47.1 + 4.2 – 3.7 +3.2 +1.1 Dec.
– –0.0 –0.4 – 0.3 + 5.8 – 6.1 +0.0 –0.1 +37.6 – 2.9 +40.0 – 5.5 +6.0 +1.0 2023 Jan.
– –0.0 +0.2 – 5.2 – 1.9 – 3.4 – –0.0 – 2.5 –35.0 +34.4 – 6.7 +4.8 +0.4 Feb.
– –0.3 +0.1 –15.2 – 3.7 –11.5 – –0.4 –29.6 –47.3 +20.2 – 8.7 +6.2 –0.1 Mar.
– +0.0 +1.1 +17.3 + 3.8 +13.5 –0.0 –0.0 – 0.1 – 7.9 + 9.8 – 8.6 +6.6 +0.0 Apr.
– +0.0 +0.2 + 2.1 – 3.0 + 5.0 –0.0 –0.1 + 5.6 – 7.9 +14.5 – 8.0 +7.1 +0.1 May
– –0.4 +0.1 –79.7 – 3.7 –76.0 +0.0 –0.5 + 2.3 –23.0 +26.0 – 7.3 +6.7 –0.1 June
– +0.0 –0.1 +10.2 + 0.8 + 9.4 – –0.0 + 3.8 –18.7 +22.8 – 7.3 +7.0 +0.2 July
– +0.1 –0.8 + 3.1 + 3.9 – 0.8 +0.0 –0.1 + 8.2 –13.2 +21.3 – 8.5 +8.5 +0.2 Aug.
– –0.2 +0.1 –49.4 – 1.1 –48.3 –0.0 –0.4 + 0.9 –10.5 +10.7 – 5.7 +6.3 +0.2 Sep.
– –0.1 –0.1 +19.9 – 0.7 +20.6 –0.0 –0.1 + 8.7 –13.4 +14.0 – 6.4 +14.6 +0.3 Oct.
– –0.1 +0.3 + 4.6 + 3.3 + 1.3 +0.0 –0.0 +19.3 + 8.5 – 1.0 – 7.1 +18.8 +0.3 Nov.
including subordinated liabilities.  4 Including liabilities arising from monetary policy
operations with the Bundesbank.  5 Own acceptances and promissory notes
outstanding.  6 Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999,including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  7 Excluding
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8).  8 Including liabilities
arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
28•
IV. Banks
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Credit balances and loans, bills Loans and bills
PeriodCash in
hand
(non-
euro area
banknotes
and
coins) Total TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termNegotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
banksSecurities
issued by
banksMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termTreasury
bills and
negotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
non-banksSecurities
issued by
non-banks
End of year or month *
2013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2017 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
2018 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.1
2019 0.2 1,064.2 814.0 532.7 281.3 1.8 248.5 3.7 795.3 513.1 111.0 402.1 7.7 274.5
2020 0.2 1,024.3 784.8 532.1 252.8 2.6 236.8 4.0 822.8 523.0 125.4 397.5 11.3 288.5
2021 0.3 1,100.7 877.5 614.7 262.7 0.4 222.8 3.5 871.2 572.2 151.5 420.7 8.0 290.9
2022 0.2 1,151.3 926.6 656.2 270.4 1.7 223.0 3.7 913.7 616.2 173.0 443.2 14.9 282.6
2022 June 0.6 1,232.7 1,007.2 742.2 265.0 2.2 223.3 3.6 929.1 612.4 181.1 431.2 13.7 303.0
July 0.6 1,248.0 1,021.1 748.0 273.1 2.7 224.2 3.5 929.4 615.7 177.0 438.7 12.7 301.0
Aug. 0.5 1,266.1 1,038.5 756.2 282.4 3.4 224.2 3.4 931.5 624.9 183.9 441.0 13.4 293.2
Sep. 0.3 1,287.8 1,057.9 771.9 286.0 4.2 225.8 3.8 935.5 629.4 185.2 444.2 12.4 293.7
Oct. 0.3 1,296.6 1,065.2 787.3 277.9 3.1 228.3 3.4 931.2 629.3 182.0 447.3 12.5 289.5
Nov. 0.2 1,273.7 1,043.2 766.3 276.9 2.9 227.6 3.5 938.8 631.7 187.5 444.2 12.5 294.6
Dec. 0.2 1,151.3 926.6 656.2 270.4 1.7 223.0 3.7 913.7 616.2 173.0 443.2 14.9 282.6
2023 Jan. 0.2 1,195.3 963.1 700.1 263.0 2.7 229.5 4.0 941.0 633.6 190.9 442.7 20.1 287.3
Feb. 0.2 1,201.5 965.7 701.9 263.8 2.9 232.9 4.2 946.4 635.5 190.5 444.9 15.8 295.1
Mar. 0.2 1,203.8 968.2 704.1 264.0 2.9 232.7 4.3 953.0 630.8 187.8 443.0 12.5 309.8
Apr. 0.2 1,184.1 946.5 681.7 264.8 3.6 234.0 4.2 959.3 633.6 191.7 441.9 13.9 311.8
May 0.2 1,211.3 972.8 706.0 266.8 3.4 235.1 4.2 965.1 638.1 193.4 444.7 14.6 312.4
June 0.2 1,177.3 939.1 681.7 257.4 3.6 234.6 4.3 961.8 628.4 181.4 447.0 15.8 317.6
July 0.2 1,194.1 955.3 694.8 260.5 4.1 234.7 4.3 962.7 637.4 190.4 447.0 16.4 308.9
Aug. 0.2 1,197.1 959.5 693.8 265.7 3.7 233.9 4.3 954.8 630.9 181.3 449.6 16.2 307.8
Sep. 0.2 1,203.3 966.5 687.9 278.6 3.5 233.3 4.2 958.8 633.0 183.8 449.2 16.1 309.7
Oct. 0.2 1,212.3 975.9 689.7 286.2 3.6 232.8 4.2 956.8 635.7 188.7 447.0 14.6 306.5
Nov. 0.2 1,190.3 954.5 674.0 280.5 3.3 232.4 4.2 971.3 645.4 194.5 450.9 15.3 310.6
Changes *
2014 –0.0 +86.1 +80.1 +63.2 +16.8 +0.7 +5.3 –0.6 +5.7 –10.2 –12.8 +2.7 – 1.8 +17.7
2015 +0.1 –91.8 –86.0 –82.2 –3.8 –6.7 +0.8 –0.1 –6.1 –9.2 –6.5 –2.7 + 1.1 +2.0
2016 +0.0 –25.5 –14.5 –38.2 +23.7 –0.7 –10.3 –0.0 +17.4 +28.9 +10.1 +18.8 – 3.0 –8.5
2017 +0.0 –57.2 –48.7 –61.5 +12.8 +0.0 –8.5 +0.6 –4.7 +13.0 +8.6 +4.4 + 0.7 –18.4
2018 +0.0 +49.6 +34.0 +57.7 –23.7 +0.2 +15.3 +0.7 +18.3 +28.3 +3.2 +25.2 – 0.4 –9.7
2019 –0.0 –4.1 –11.3 –21.9 +10.7 +0.8 +6.3 +0.7 +26.8 +19.9 +12.7 +7.3 + 3.0 +3.8
2020 –0.0 –32.0 –22.4 –6.6 –15.8 +0.9 –10.5 +0.3 +34.4 +14.7 +9.0 +5.7 + 3.6 +16.1
2021 +0.0 +52.8 +71.1 +68.9 +2.2 –2.5 –15.8 –0.5 +37.8 +39.7 +29.8 +9.9 – 3.2 +1.4
2022 –0.1 +21.7 +20.4 +17.9 +2.6 +1.3 –0.0 +0.2 +37.0 +37.0 +16.8 +20.2 + 6.7 –6.7
2022 June +0.0 –15.4 –14.4 –10.3 –4.1 +0.5 –1.6 +0.0 +9.7 –1.7 –2.3 +0.6 + 0.2 +11.2
July –0.0 +8.4 +7.3 +1.7 +5.6 +0.5 +0.7 –0.1 –4.7 –0.7 –5.3 +4.6 – 1.1 –2.9
Aug. –0.1 +13.9 +13.2 +6.0 +7.2 +0.7 –0.0 –0.2 +0.1 +7.7 +6.3 +1.4 + 0.7 –8.4
Sep. –0.2 +15.0 +12.6 +11.8 +0.8 +0.8 +1.6 +0.4 +3.2 +1.4 –0.2 +1.6 – 1.0 +2.9
Oct. +0.0 +13.4 +11.9 +18.2 –6.3 –1.0 +2.5 –0.3 –2.2 +1.4 –2.9 +4.3 + 0.0 –3.6
Nov. –0.1 –9.4 –8.7 –13.4 +4.7 –0.2 –0.4 +0.1 +16.5 +9.7 +5.5 +4.2 – 0.0 +6.8
Dec. –0.0 –112.4 –106.8 –104.0 –2.8 –1.2 –4.4 +0.2 –19.9 –11.2 –12.7 +1.5 + 2.4 –11.1
2023 Jan. –0.0 +48.2 +40.6 +46.3 –5.7 +1.1 +6.5 +0.3 +30.0 +19.5 +18.6 +0.9 + 5.3 +5.2
Feb. +0.0 +0.6 –2.8 –1.2 –1.6 +0.1 +3.3 +0.2 +1.6 –1.2 –1.3 +0.1 – 4.4 +7.2
Mar. –0.0 +9.2 +9.2 +6.2 +3.0 –0.0 –0.1 +0.1 +11.2 –1.1 –1.5 +0.4 – 3.3 +15.5
Apr. +0.0 –17.0 –19.0 –20.9 +1.9 +0.7 +1.3 –0.1 +8.2 +4.4 +4.5 –0.1 + 1.5 +2.4
May +0.0 +16.9 +16.2 +18.0 –1.8 –0.2 +0.9 –0.0 +1.5 +1.4 +1.3 +0.1 + 0.6 –0.5
June +0.0 –17.7 –17.6 –9.9 –7.6 +0.2 –0.3 +0.1 –1.9 –8.7 –11.1 +2.4 + 1.2 +5.6
July –0.0 +18.4 +17.7 +13.9 +3.9 +0.5 +0.2 +0.0 +3.0 +10.5 +9.6 +0.9 + 0.7 –8.2
Aug. –0.0 +0.0 +1.3 –2.2 +3.5 –0.4 –0.9 –0.0 –10.2 –8.3 –9.8 +1.5 – 0.3 –1.6
Sep. +0.0 –1.0 –0.0 –10.1 +10.1 –0.2 –0.7 –0.0 –0.1 –1.2 +1.3 –2.5 – 0.1 +1.1
Oct. +0.0 +10.3 +10.6 +2.6 +8.0 +0.1 –0.4 –0.1 –0.7 +3.8 +5.2 –1.4 – 1.6 –3.0
Nov. – –14.4 –13.9 –11.5 –2.4 –0.2 –0.3 +0.0 +18.7 +12.9 +7.6 +5.3 + 0.8 +5.0
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequentrevisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
29•
IV. Banks
Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Time deposits (including bank
savings bonds)Time deposits (including
savings deposits and bank
savings bonds)
Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loansPartici-
pating
interests
in foreign
banks
and
enter-
prises TotalSight
deposits TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
deposits TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
30.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 2013
14.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 2016
12.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 2017
11.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1 2018
11.5 21.3 680.6 339.3 341.2 243.2 98.0 – 229.8 112.3 117.4 60.5 57.0 0.1 2019
11.3 17.2 761.2 428.8 332.5 205.1 127.3 – 258.5 133.3 125.2 65.6 59.7 0.1 2020
11.1 16.6 914.6 456.0 458.6 301.5 157.2 0.0 288.2 141.9 146.2 68.7 77.6 0.1 2021
10.4 15.7 998.4 480.0 518.4 376.4 141.9 – 370.3 196.0 174.3 84.4 89.8 0.1 2022
11.0 15.9 1,100.2 625.5 474.7 340.6 134.1 0.0 387.6 222.7 164.9 82.5 82.4 0.3 2022 June
10.6 15.8 1,107.4 608.8 498.6 359.0 139.6 0.0 390.2 221.6 168.6 87.5 81.1 0.3 July
10.6 15.8 1,120.4 610.9 509.5 360.5 149.0 0.0 400.4 231.3 169.2 87.4 81.8 0.2 Aug.
10.6 15.9 1,169.6 639.0 530.6 373.0 157.6 0.0 409.1 231.4 177.7 95.7 82.0 0.2 Sep.
10.6 15.9 1,188.9 657.6 531.3 372.1 159.2 0.0 401.8 220.0 181.8 100.0 81.8 0.2 Oct.
10.6 15.8 1,150.7 612.1 538.7 385.9 152.7 – 414.1 235.1 179.0 91.2 87.7 0.1 Nov.
10.4 15.7 998.4 480.0 518.4 376.4 141.9 – 370.3 196.0 174.3 84.4 89.8 0.1 Dec.
10.4 15.6 1,089.4 601.2 488.3 344.5 143.8 – 405.1 213.5 191.5 101.9 89.6 0.2 2023 Jan.
10.4 15.8 1,086.8 600.1 486.7 345.1 141.6 – 418.4 218.4 200.0 109.9 90.1 0.2 Feb.
10.4 15.9 1,060.0 576.0 484.0 329.3 154.7 – 412.5 216.8 195.7 98.9 96.9 0.3 Mar.
10.4 15.9 1,042.6 540.6 502.0 343.8 158.2 – 423.3 208.8 214.6 116.6 97.9 0.3 Apr.
10.4 16.1 1,059.1 596.1 462.9 299.9 163.0 0.0 436.0 219.3 216.7 116.7 100.0 0.3 May
10.2 16.0 1,025.8 565.0 460.8 302.6 158.2 0.0 411.5 205.6 205.9 107.3 98.6 0.4 June
10.2 16.1 1,052.4 582.3 470.1 311.1 159.0 0.0 411.0 204.0 207.0 107.9 99.1 0.3 July
10.2 16.1 1,021.8 566.5 455.3 294.3 161.1 – 407.7 198.5 209.2 112.0 97.2 0.3 Aug.
10.2 16.1 1,006.0 536.9 469.1 293.9 175.2 – 403.9 206.3 197.6 100.2 97.4 0.4 Sep.
10.2 16.6 1,021.8 558.9 462.9 288.0 174.9 – 423.2 207.0 216.2 117.4 98.8 0.3 Oct.
10.4 16.4 1,003.5 537.8 465.7 291.0 174.6 – 412.5 206.3 206.3 107.1 99.2 0.3 Nov.
Changes *
+ 0.1 – 3.8 +76.3 +47.8 +28.5 +39.0 –10.5 –0.0 –43.6 –8.3 –35.3 –30.7 –4.6 +0.2 2014
– 0.6 – 6.1 –15.4 +40.6 –56.0 –48.6 – 7.4 –0.0 –26.5 –13.9 –12.6 +0.3 –13.0 –0.0 2015
– 0.1 – 1.5 +82.7 +51.0 +31.7 +27.0 + 4.7 –0.0 +3.5 –3.1 +6.7 +5.9 +0.8 –0.0 2016
– 1.0 – 4.1 –15.5 +25.2 –40.8 –43.2 + 2.4 ±0.0 +31.8 +11.0 +20.8 +15.6 +5.2 –0.4 2017
– 0.2 – 2.2 –23.9 –23.4 – 0.4 + 2.1 – 2.6 –0.0 –11.9 –0.2 –11.8 –5.7 –6.0 –0.2 2018
– 0.3 – 0.9 – 9.5 –49.4 +39.8 +28.0 +11.8 –0.0 –0.8 +2.1 –2.9 –1.8 –1.1 –0.0 2019
– 0.2 – 3.9 +83.8 +87.8 – 4.1 –34.7 +30.6 – +23.6 +13.8 +9.8 +7.1 +2.8 +0.0 2020
– 0.2 – 0.8 +136.6 +19.8 +116.8 +89.2 +27.6 +0.0 +22.7 +6.4 +16.3 +0.0 +16.3 –0.0 2021
– 0.7 – 1.0 +85.8 +29.1 +56.7 +69.6 –13.0 –0.0 +68.2 +49.0 +19.2 +13.9 +5.3 +0.0 2022
– 0.1 + 0.1 –21.2 –5.8 –15.4 –13.0 – 2.4 – +3.5 +4.7 –1.2 –3.4 +2.2 +0.0 2022 June
– 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.3 –20.0 +19.7 +16.2 + 3.5 +0.0 +0.1 –2.2 +2.3 +4.0 –1.8 –0.0 July
+ 0.1 + 0.0 + 9.7 +0.3 + 9.4 + 0.3 + 9.2 –0.0 +8.9 +9.1 –0.2 –0.7 +0.5 –0.0 Aug.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 +42.5 +25.4 +17.2 + 9.4 + 7.7 – +6.9 –0.7 +7.5 +7.5 –0.0 +0.0 Sep.
– + 0.0 +22.6 +20.5 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 1.9 – –5.9 –10.8 +5.0 +4.9 +0.1 –0.1 Oct.
– 0.0 – 0.0 –24.1 –41.3 +17.2 +17.4 – 0.2 –0.0 +5.3 +13.1 –7.9 –7.4 –0.5 –0.0 Nov.
– 0.2 – 0.0 –145.0 –128.3 –16.7 – 6.9 – 9.8 – –40.7 –37.2 –3.5 –6.2 +2.7 –0.0 Dec.
– 0.0 – 0.1 +93.8 +122.3 –28.4 –30.8 + 2.4 – +35.9 +18.1 +17.8 +17.9 –0.1 +0.0 2023 Jan.
+ 0.0 + 0.2 – 7.0 –3.5 – 3.5 – 0.9 – 2.6 – +11.6 +4.1 +7.5 +7.2 +0.3 +0.1 Feb.
+ 0.0 + 0.2 –21.8 –21.5 – 0.3 –13.9 +13.6 – –3.9 –0.8 –3.1 –10.0 +7.0 +0.1 Mar.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 –15.3 –34.3 +19.0 +15.2 + 3.8 – +11.7 –7.7 +19.3 +18.1 +1.2 –0.0 Apr.
+ 0.0 + 0.2 +10.1 +52.6 –42.5 –46.3 + 3.8 +0.0 +9.2 +9.5 –0.3 –1.2 +0.9 –0.0 May
– 0.2 – 0.0 –26.4 –26.1 – 0.3 + 3.9 – 4.2 – –23.1 –13.1 –9.9 –8.7 –1.2 +0.1 June
– 0.0 + 0.1 +27.3 +17.2 +10.1 + 9.0 + 1.1 – +0.4 –1.3 +1.7 +1.1 +0.6 –0.0 July
+ 0.0 – 0.0 –32.6 –16.4 –16.2 –17.9 + 1.7 –0.0 –4.3 –5.9 +1.6 +3.6 –2.0 –0.0 Aug.
– 0.0 – 0.0 –21.0 –32.3 +11.4 – 2.2 +13.5 – –5.7 +7.1 –12.8 –12.8 +0.0 +0.0 Sep.
+ 0.0 + 0.5 +17.0 +22.8 – 5.8 – 5.6 – 0.2 – +19.6 +0.9 +18.7 +17.3 +1.4 –0.1 Oct.
+ 0.2 – 0.1 –13.0 –18.6 + 5.5 + 4.9 + 0.6 – –8.6 +0.6 –9.2 –9.8 +0.6 –0.0 Nov.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
30•
IV. Banks
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Short-term lending Medium- and long-term Lending to domestic
non-banks, total
to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
Periodincluding
negotiable
money market
paper, securities,
equalisation
claimsexcluding
negotiable
money market
paper, securities,
equalisation
claims Total TotalLoans
and
billsNegotiable
money
market
paper Total LoansTreasury
bills Total Total
End of year or month *
2013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2017 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
2018 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 – 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.8
2019 3,521.5 3,119.5 260.4 238.8 238.4 0.4 21.6 18.7 2.9 3,261.1 2,866.9
2020 3,647.0 3,245.3 243.3 221.6 221.2 0.4 21.6 18.0 3.6 3,403.8 3,013.0
2021 3,798.1 3,392.7 249.7 232.2 231.9 0.3 17.5 15.2 2.3 3,548.4 3,174.6
2022 4,015.6 3,613.3 296.4 279.8 279.4 0.4 16.7 14.3 2.3 3,719.2 3,359.9
2022 June 3,906.6 3,513.5 290.8 271.4 270.5 0.9 19.5 16.6 2.8 3,615.7 3,255.8
July 3,945.0 3,539.3 291.4 271.8 270.9 0.8 19.6 16.8 2.8 3,653.7 3,293.5
Aug. 3,976.0 3,574.4 305.0 287.3 286.4 0.8 17.7 14.7 3.1 3,671.0 3,314.3
Sep. 3,993.6 3,595.5 311.0 292.8 292.2 0.6 18.2 15.2 3.0 3,682.6 3,329.1
Oct. 4,014.1 3,611.8 308.7 288.9 288.4 0.5 19.9 16.1 3.8 3,705.3 3,347.5
Nov. 4,025.7 3,625.4 310.7 292.9 292.6 0.4 17.7 14.5 3.2 3,715.0 3,359.0
Dec. 4,015.6 3,613.3 296.4 279.8 279.4 0.4 16.7 14.3 2.3 3,719.2 3,359.9
2023 Jan. 4,016.2 3,622.5 303.2 282.5 281.9 0.5 20.7 17.0 3.8 3,713.1 3,360.2
Feb. 4,030.2 3,629.5 297.8 279.9 279.2 0.7 18.0 15.8 2.2 3,732.4 3,371.2
Mar. 4,030.5 3,634.8 305.0 285.1 284.4 0.7 19.9 16.3 3.6 3,725.5 3,369.3
Apr. 4,032.5 3,641.3 304.1 283.3 282.8 0.6 20.8 18.2 2.6 3,728.4 3,374.4
May 4,039.0 3,650.6 299.7 281.0 280.2 0.8 18.7 17.4 1.3 3,739.3 3,388.0
June 4,042.1 3,645.7 300.3 280.5 279.6 0.9 19.8 17.8 2.0 3,741.8 3,388.7
July 4,048.7 3,653.9 299.4 277.4 276.6 0.9 21.9 19.6 2.3 3,749.3 3,395.5
Aug. 4,046.7 3,650.0 289.5 270.8 270.1 0.7 18.6 16.8 1.8 3,757.2 3,398.6
Sep. 4,048.1 3,653.6 297.2 275.5 274.8 0.6 21.7 19.0 2.7 3,751.0 3,395.8
Oct. 4,051.9 3,656.7 293.6 270.9 270.3 0.6 22.7 20.3 2.4 3,758.3 3,401.0
Nov. 4,057.9 3,661.3 291.1 272.0 271.4 0.7 19.0 16.6 2.4 3,766.9 3,404.2
Changes *
2014 + 36.7 + 20.5 – 11.6 – 4.5 – 4.5 – 0.0 – 7.1 – 6.5 – 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 – 1.3 – 0.9 – 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 – 5.2 – 0.3 – 0.4 + 0.1 – 4.9 – 4.8 – 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.8
2017 + 57.0 + 70.2 – 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 – 12.1 – 12.4 + 0.3 + 63.5 + 103.4
2018 + 71.5 + 105.3 + 6.6 + 15.8 + 15.7 + 0.1 – 9.2 – 8.6 – 0.6 + 65.0 + 102.0
2019 + 126.7 + 129.1 + 11.7 + 11.6 + 11.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 3.0 + 3.1 + 115.0 + 132.8
2020 + 123.2 + 123.6 – 19.6 – 19.8 – 19.8 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.7 + 142.8 + 145.6
2021 + 152.2 + 147.8 + 8.8 + 13.8 + 13.8 – 0.1 – 4.9 – 2.8 – 2.1 + 143.4 + 157.9
2022 + 216.7 + 220.0 + 47.6 + 48.5 + 48.5 + 0.0 – 0.9 – 0.9 + 0.0 + 169.1 + 184.8
2022 June + 19.9 + 24.5 + 10.8 + 8.9 + 9.0 – 0.1 + 1.9 + 1.3 + 0.6 + 9.1 + 13.2
July + 36.1 + 23.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.1 + 35.8 + 35.6
Aug. + 30.9 + 35.1 + 13.7 + 15.5 + 15.5 + 0.0 – 1.9 – 2.1 + 0.3 + 17.2 + 20.8
Sep. + 16.5 + 20.0 + 4.8 + 4.4 + 4.6 – 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.6 – 0.1 + 11.7 + 14.8
Oct. + 20.7 + 16.6 – 2.0 – 3.6 – 3.5 – 0.1 + 1.6 + 0.8 + 0.8 + 22.7 + 18.5
Nov. + 12.0 + 13.9 + 2.2 + 4.4 + 4.5 – 0.1 – 2.1 – 1.5 – 0.6 + 9.7 + 11.8
Dec. – 9.6 – 11.7 – 13.9 – 12.8 – 12.7 – 0.0 – 1.1 – 0.2 – 0.9 + 4.2 + 1.8
2023 Jan. + 0.6 + 9.2 + 6.7 + 2.6 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 4.1 + 2.6 + 1.4 – 6.1 + 0.3
Feb. + 13.3 + 6.3 – 6.0 – 3.2 – 3.3 + 0.1 – 2.8 – 1.2 – 1.6 + 19.3 + 11.0
Mar. + 0.9 + 6.0 + 7.6 + 5.7 + 5.7 – 0.0 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 1.4 – 6.7 – 1.8
Apr. + 2.1 + 6.5 – 0.9 – 1.7 – 1.7 – 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.9 – 1.1 + 3.0 + 5.1
May + 6.5 + 9.4 – 4.4 – 2.3 – 2.6 + 0.3 – 2.1 – 0.8 – 1.2 + 10.9 + 13.6
June + 4.4 – 3.7 + 1.7 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 2.7 + 0.9
July + 6.6 + 8.3 – 1.0 – 3.1 – 3.1 – 0.0 + 2.1 + 1.9 + 0.2 + 7.5 + 6.9
Aug. – 1.9 – 4.0 – 9.9 – 6.6 – 6.5 – 0.2 – 3.3 – 2.8 – 0.5 + 8.0 + 3.1
Sep. + 1.3 + 3.7 + 7.7 + 4.6 + 4.7 – 0.1 + 3.1 + 2.1 + 0.9 – 6.4 – 2.9
Oct. + 3.7 + 3.0 – 3.5 – 4.6 – 4.5 – 0.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 – 0.3 + 7.2 + 5.2
Nov. + 6.1 + 4.7 – 2.3 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.1 – 3.7 – 3.7 + 0.0 + 8.4 + 3.6
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims (see also
footnote 2).  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation
claims.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
31•
IV. Banks
lending
prises and households to general government
Loans Loans
TotalMedium-
termLong-
term SecuritiesMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total TotalMedium-
termLong-
termSecur-
ities  1Equal-
isation
claims  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
2,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 – 2.7 2013
2,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 – 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 – 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 – 1.8 2016
2,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 – 1.7 2017
2,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 – 1.4 2018
2,626.4 301.3 2,325.1 240.5 15.7 394.2 235.9 17.2 218.8 158.2 – 1.5 2019
2,771.8 310.5 2,461.4 241.1 22.4 390.8 234.3 15.7 218.6 156.6 – 1.1 2020
2,915.7 314.5 2,601.2 258.9 24.7 373.8 229.9 14.3 215.6 143.9 – 1.0 2021
3,085.9 348.7 2,737.1 274.0 24.6 359.3 233.7 14.1 219.6 125.6 – 1.0 2022
2,998.2 322.2 2,675.9 257.6 25.0 360.0 228.2 13.6 214.6 131.7 – 1.0 2022 June
3,022.5 327.7 2,694.9 271.0 24.9 360.2 229.0 13.5 215.5 131.2 – 1.0 July
3,044.6 335.4 2,709.1 269.8 24.9 356.6 228.7 13.5 215.2 127.9 – 1.0 Aug.
3,058.8 339.5 2,719.3 270.2 24.8 353.5 229.3 13.8 215.4 124.3 – 1.0 Sep.
3,077.4 344.8 2,732.7 270.1 24.8 357.8 229.9 13.8 216.1 127.9 – 1.0 Oct.
3,086.6 344.9 2,741.7 272.4 24.8 356.0 231.7 13.9 217.8 124.3 – 1.0 Nov.
3,085.9 348.7 2,737.1 274.0 24.6 359.3 233.7 14.1 219.6 125.6 – 1.0 Dec.
3,090.3 349.9 2,740.4 269.9 24.6 352.9 233.4 13.8 219.5 119.5 – 1.0 2023 Jan.
3,102.0 355.3 2,746.7 269.2 24.5 361.2 232.5 13.7 218.8 128.7 – 1.1 Feb.
3,101.5 354.8 2,746.7 267.8 23.6 356.2 232.6 13.6 219.0 123.6 – 1.0 Mar.
3,107.6 355.6 2,752.0 266.8 23.6 354.0 232.7 13.9 218.8 121.2 – 1.0 Apr.
3,120.7 360.8 2,760.0 267.2 23.7 351.4 232.4 13.6 218.8 119.0 – 1.0 May
3,117.4 360.0 2,757.5 271.3 23.3 353.1 230.9 13.4 217.6 122.2 – 1.0 June
3,125.3 362.1 2,763.3 270.2 23.4 353.8 232.4 13.5 218.9 121.4 – 1.0 July
3,130.4 362.8 2,767.6 268.2 23.4 358.6 232.6 13.8 218.8 126.0 – 1.0 Aug.
3,126.8 359.5 2,767.3 269.0 23.2 355.1 233.0 13.7 219.4 122.1 – 1.0 Sep.
3,131.2 360.7 2,770.5 269.8 23.1 357.3 234.8 13.8 221.0 122.4 – 1.0 Oct.
3,135.5 361.4 2,774.1 268.7 23.0 362.7 237.8 14.1 223.8 124.8 – 1.0 Nov.
Changes *
+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 +12.5 – 1.8 – 4.1 – 8.5 – 5.1 – 3.4 + 4.3 – – 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 +14.8 – 2.1 – 6.6 – 6.9 – 4.8 – 2.0 + 0.2 – + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 – 0.9 – 30.9 – 7.3 – 4.0 – 3.3 –23.6 – – 0.4 2016
+ 87.6 + 9.4 + 78.2 +15.8 + 0.1 – 39.9 –10.6 – 1.3 – 9.3 –29.4 – – 0.1 2017
+108.7 +19.3 + 89.4 – 6.7 – 0.9 – 37.1 –10.5 – 2.7 – 7.8 –26.6 – – 0.0 2018
+126.0 +18.9 +107.2 + 6.8 – 0.8 – 17.8 – 5.5 – 2.6 – 2.9 –12.3 – + 0.1 2019
+145.0 + 9.4 +135.5 + 0.6 + 6.1 – 2.8 – 1.1 – 1.5 + 0.4 – 1.7 – – 0.4 2020
+140.1 + 5.6 +134.5 +17.8 + 2.3 – 14.6 – 3.3 – 1.3 – 2.0 –11.3 – – 0.0 2021
+169.9 +33.5 +136.4 +14.9 – 0.1 – 15.7 + 2.5 – 0.7 + 3.3 –18.2 – – 0.0 2022
+ 15.1 + 2.5 + 12.6 – 1.9 – 0.1 – 4.1 – 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.8 – 3.2 – – 0.0 2022 June
+ 22.5 + 4.4 + 18.1 +13.1 – 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.7 – 0.1 + 0.8 – 0.5 – – 0.0 July
+ 22.0 + 7.7 + 14.3 – 1.2 – 0.0 – 3.6 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.2 – 3.3 – + 0.0 Aug.
+ 14.3 + 4.0 + 10.4 + 0.5 – 0.1 – 3.1 + 0.5 – 0.2 + 0.7 – 3.6 – + 0.0 Sep.
+ 18.6 + 5.3 + 13.4 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 4.2 + 0.6 – 0.0 + 0.6 + 3.6 – – 0.0 Oct.
+ 9.4 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 2.4 + 0.0 – 2.1 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 1.4 – 3.6 – + 0.0 Nov.
+ 0.3 + 4.0 – 3.7 + 1.6 – 0.3 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.9 + 1.4 – – 0.0 Dec.
+ 4.4 + 1.2 + 3.3 – 4.2 + 0.0 – 6.4 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 6.1 – – 0.0 2023 Jan.
+ 11.7 + 5.4 + 6.4 – 0.7 – 0.1 + 8.3 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.7 + 9.2 – + 0.1 Feb.
– 0.4 – 0.5 + 0.0 – 1.4 – 0.3 – 4.8 + 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.3 – 5.1 – – 0.0 Mar.
+ 6.1 + 0.8 + 5.3 – 1.0 + 0.0 – 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 – 0.2 – 2.3 – + 0.0 Apr.
+ 13.2 + 5.2 + 8.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 – 2.7 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 2.3 – – 0.0 May
– 3.2 – 1.3 – 2.0 + 4.1 – 0.3 + 1.8 – 1.5 – 0.2 – 1.2 + 3.2 – – 0.0 June
+ 8.0 + 1.8 + 6.2 – 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 1.3 – 0.8 – – 0.0 July
+ 5.1 + 0.8 + 4.3 – 2.0 + 0.1 + 4.8 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.1 + 4.6 – – 0.0 Aug.
– 3.6 – 3.3 – 0.2 + 0.7 – 0.2 – 3.5 + 0.4 – 0.2 + 0.6 – 3.9 – – 0.0 Sep.
+ 4.4 + 1.1 + 3.2 + 0.8 – 0.1 + 2.1 + 1.8 + 0.2 + 1.6 + 0.3 – – 0.0 Oct.
+ 4.7 + 0.6 + 4.1 – 1.1 – 0.1 + 4.8 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 2.4 – + 0.0 Nov.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
32•
IV. Banks
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
billion €
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios)  1
of which:
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
Period TotalMortgage
loans,
total TotalMortgage
loans
secured
by
residen-
tial real
estateOther
housing
loans Totalof which:
Housing
loansManufac-
turingElectricity,
gas and
water
supply;
refuse
disposal,          
mining
and
quarryingConstruc-
tionWhole-
sale and
retail
trade;
repair of
motor                
vehicles
and
motor-
cyclesAgri-
culture,
forestry,
fishing
and
aqua-
cultureTransport-
ation and
storage;
post and                      
telecom-
munica-
tionsFinancial
intermedi-
ation
(excluding
MFIs) and
insurance   
com-
panies
Lending, total                                                 End of year or quarter *
2021 3,147.5 1,591.4 1,678.2 1,373.0 305.2 1,701.5 477.2 146.1 128.3 98.0 140.4 55.9 55.6 186.3
2022 Q3 3,351.0 1,659.4 1,758.3 1,433.0 325.2 1,845.3 503.1 163.6 147.5 107.3 163.3 56.9 64.9 202.3
Q4 3,365.3 1,676.5 1,773.9 1,448.0 325.8 1,852.2 509.1 160.0 137.7 108.8 155.1 56.3 65.2 211.9
2023 Q1 3,385.9 1,687.3 1,779.0 1,457.3 321.7 1,872.4 512.9 162.8 138.1 110.9 157.5 56.1 63.1 222.8
Q2 3,397.0 1,701.4 1,787.6 1,471.4 316.3 1,879.4 517.7 162.6 137.7 112.5 159.2 56.3 61.9 221.5
Q3 3,401.6 1,735.7 1,797.1 1,505.7 291.5 1,878.2 522.3 160.0 134.7 113.3 159.5 56.4 61.3 223.0
Short-term lending
2021 231.8 – 6.9 – 6.9 202.7 4.4 31.6 9.1 18.0 36.4 3.3 3.9 35.0
2022 Q3 292.2 – 7.4 – 7.4 260.7 4.9 46.2 24.4 21.1 45.3 3.6 4.2 42.2
Q4 279.4 – 7.4 – 7.4 248.9 5.0 41.6 12.1 20.8 44.7 3.3 3.8 49.8
2023 Q1 284.4 – 7.6 – 7.6 253.6 5.3 43.4 8.1 21.9 46.5 3.4 3.7 54.0
Q2 279.6 – 7.6 – 7.6 248.9 5.4 42.3 7.7 22.6 46.8 3.8 3.6 50.4
Q3 274.8 – 7.5 – 7.5 244.4 5.4 40.4 5.6 22.6 47.2 3.8 3.8 51.3
Medium-term lending
2021 314.5 – 40.5 – 40.5 239.5 20.6 28.3 5.4 19.3 20.8 4.3 12.3 52.0
2022 Q3 339.5 – 43.2 – 43.2 265.9 23.1 30.5 6.0 21.6 23.4 4.3 22.2 54.4
Q4 348.7 – 43.4 – 43.4 275.8 23.5 31.2 6.5 22.2 24.3 4.1 23.0 56.2
2023 Q1 354.8 – 42.8 – 42.8 283.5 23.7 32.5 9.2 22.4 24.8 4.1 21.0 59.3
Q2 360.0 – 42.8 – 42.8 289.3 24.1 34.0 8.0 22.8 26.9 4.1 19.1 61.3
Q3 359.5 – 42.8 – 42.8 289.2 24.5 34.7 5.8 23.0 26.9 4.1 18.2 62.5
Long-term lending
2021 2,601.2 1,591.4 1,630.9 1,373.0 257.8 1,259.3 452.2 86.2 113.8 60.8 83.2 48.3 39.4 99.3
2022 Q3 2,719.3 1,659.4 1,707.6 1,433.0 274.6 1,318.6 475.1 86.8 117.1 64.7 94.6 49.0 38.6 105.6
Q4 2,737.1 1,676.5 1,723.1 1,448.0 275.1 1,327.5 480.6 87.2 119.0 65.8 86.1 48.9 38.4 105.9
2023 Q1 2,746.7 1,687.3 1,728.6 1,457.3 271.3 1,335.3 483.9 86.9 120.8 66.6 86.1 48.6 38.4 109.5
Q2 2,757.5 1,701.4 1,737.2 1,471.4 265.9 1,341.2 488.2 86.3 122.1 67.1 85.5 48.5 39.2 109.7
Q3 2,767.3 1,735.7 1,746.8 1,505.7 241.2 1,344.7 492.4 85.0 123.3 67.7 85.3 48.5 39.2 109.1
Lending, total                                                 Change during quarter *
2022 Q3 +79.0 +23.4 +26.9 +20.5 + 6.4 +58.5 + 8.6 + 2.5 +14.9 + 2.7 + 9.6 – 0.1 + 8.5 + 2.0
Q4 +16.5 +17.2 +15.4 +14.8 + 0.6 + 8.9 + 5.9 – 3.2 – 9.9 + 1.4 – 2.7 – 0.6 + 0.3 +10.2
2023 Q1 +20.4 +11.3 + 4.8 + 8.6 – 3.8 +19.9 + 3.5 + 2.8 + 0.4 + 2.1 + 2.1 – 0.2 – 2.1 +10.6
Q2 +12.4 +11.5 + 9.1 +11.5 – 2.4 + 8.2 + 5.3 – 0.1 – 0.4 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 0.2 – 0.9 – 0.2
Q3 + 4.7 +10.9 + 9.2 +11.2 – 2.0 – 1.4 + 4.2 – 2.5 – 2.9 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 – 0.6 + 1.3
Short-term lending
2022 Q3 +20.2 – + 0.3 – + 0.3 +19.8 + 0.3 + 0.7 +12.8 + 0.9 + 2.8 – 0.3 – 0.2 + 0.1
Q4 –11.8 – – 0.0 – – 0.0 –10.8 + 0.1 – 4.3 –12.3 – 0.3 – 0.5 – 0.3 – 0.3 + 7.8
2023 Q1 + 4.7 – + 0.2 – + 0.2 + 4.7 + 0.3 + 1.8 – 4.0 + 1.1 + 1.9 + 0.2 – 0.1 + 3.9
Q2 – 3.7 – – 0.0 – – 0.0 – 3.6 + 0.1 – 1.1 – 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.0 – 2.4
Q3 – 4.8 – – 0.1 – – 0.1 – 4.7 – 0.0 – 1.9 – 2.1 – 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.9
Medium-term lending
2022 Q3 +16.1 – + 0.9 – + 0.9 +16.1 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 1.1 – 0.0 + 8.9 + 0.8
Q4 + 9.3 – + 0.1 – + 0.1 +10.0 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.9 – 0.1 + 0.8 + 1.9
2023 Q1 + 6.1 – – 0.5 – – 0.5 + 7.6 + 0.3 + 1.2 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 0.5 – 0.1 – 2.0 + 3.0
Q2 + 4.7 – – 0.0 – – 0.0 + 5.4 + 0.4 + 1.6 – 1.3 + 0.4 + 2.0 – 0.0 – 1.6 + 2.1
Q3 – 0.8 – – 0.2 – – 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.7 – 2.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.9 + 1.1
Long-term lending
2022 Q3 +42.7 +23.4 +25.7 +20.5 + 5.2 +22.6 + 7.4 + 0.3 + 1.9 + 1.3 + 5.7 + 0.3 – 0.2 + 1.2
Q4 +19.0 +17.2 +15.3 +14.8 + 0.5 + 9.7 + 5.3 + 0.3 + 1.9 + 1.1 – 3.1 – 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.5
2023 Q1 + 9.6 +11.3 + 5.1 + 8.6 – 3.5 + 7.6 + 2.9 – 0.3 + 1.7 + 0.8 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 3.7
Q2 +11.3 +11.5 + 9.1 +11.5 – 2.4 + 6.4 + 4.8 – 0.6 + 1.3 + 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.1
Q3 +10.3 +10.9 + 9.5 +11.2 – 1.7 + 3.8 + 4.0 – 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.6 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.6
* Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical breaks have been eliminatedfrom the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
visional; subsequent alterations, which appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
33•
IV. Banks
Lending to employees and other individualsLending to
non-profit institutions
Services sector (including the professions) Memo items: Other lending
of which: of which:
TotalHousing
enterprisesHolding
companiesOther
real
estate
activitiesLending
to self-
employed
persons  2Lending
to craft
enterprises TotalHousing
loans TotalInstalment
loans  3Debit
balances
on wage,
salary
and
pension
accounts Totalof which:
Housing
loans   Period
End of year or quarter *                                   Lending, total
890.8 308.6 63.8 207.9 483.8 48.3 1,429.3 1,196.6 232.7 184.1 6.9 16.7 4.4 2021
939.6 329.1 71.2 215.5 500.0 54.1 1,488.6 1,250.6 238.0 187.3 7.5 17.1 4.6 2022 Q3
957.4 334.0 79.9 218.2 501.7 54.1 1,495.8 1,260.1 235.7 185.9 7.1 17.3 4.6 Q4
961.2 336.3 78.6 220.4 503.4 54.2 1,496.2 1,261.4 234.7 185.5 7.3 17.4 4.7 2023 Q1
967.7 340.4 78.1 220.8 504.3 55.0 1,500.1 1,265.2 234.9 186.0 7.3 17.5 4.7 Q2
970.0 344.0 76.3 222.5 505.0 54.6 1,505.9 1,270.1 235.7 186.9 7.3 17.5 4.7 Q3
Short-term lending
65.5 14.5 13.0 10.0 19.7 3.8 28.6 2.5 26.1 1.4 6.9 0.5 0.0 2021
73.8 15.8 14.9 11.2 20.9 5.3 30.8 2.5 28.3 1.7 7.5 0.6 0.0 2022 Q3
73.0 16.1 15.6 10.8 20.4 5.0 29.9 2.4 27.5 1.7 7.1 0.6 – Q4
72.5 16.5 14.9 11.6 21.0 5.3 30.2 2.3 27.9 2.1 7.3 0.6 –2023 Q1
71.7 16.5 14.2 11.0 21.0 6.7 30.1 2.2 27.9 2.3 7.3 0.6 – Q2
69.7 16.2 13.2 11.6 20.6 6.5 29.9 2.1 27.8 2.2 7.3 0.6 – Q3
Medium-term lending
97.0 23.1 15.2 27.1 30.0 3.3 74.4 19.8 54.6 50.6 – 0.6 0.1 2021
103.6 25.2 17.7 27.5 30.4 6.4 73.0 20.1 52.9 48.7 – 0.5 0.1 2022 Q3
108.2 25.4 20.1 28.4 30.1 6.5 72.3 19.8 52.5 48.0 – 0.6 0.1 Q4
110.3 25.3 21.4 29.0 30.3 6.4 70.8 19.0 51.8 47.3 – 0.5 0.1 2023 Q1
113.1 25.9 22.0 29.5 30.9 6.2 70.1 18.6 51.5 46.9 – 0.6 0.1 Q2
113.9 26.5 20.8 30.9 31.1 6.2 69.7 18.2 51.5 46.9 – 0.6 0.1 Q3
Long-term lending
728.4 271.1 35.6 170.8 434.1 41.3 1,326.3 1,174.3 152.0 132.1 – 15.6 4.3 2021
762.2 288.0 38.5 176.7 448.7 42.5 1,384.8 1,228.0 156.7 137.0 – 15.9 4.5 2022 Q3
776.2 292.6 44.2 179.0 451.1 42.6 1,393.5 1,237.9 155.6 136.2 – 16.1 4.6 Q4
778.4 294.6 42.4 179.7 452.1 42.5 1,395.1 1,240.1 155.1 136.1 – 16.3 4.6 2023 Q1
782.8 298.0 41.9 180.3 452.3 42.1 1,399.9 1,244.4 155.5 136.8 – 16.3 4.6 Q2
786.5 301.3 42.3 180.0 453.3 41.9 1,406.3 1,249.8 156.4 137.8 – 16.4 4.6 Q3
Change during quarter *                                    Lending, total
+18.3 + 6.2 + 3.1 + 3.9 + 4.3 + 0.2 +20.4 +18.2 + 2.1 + 1.5 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 2022 Q3
+13.3 + 4.9 + 3.5 + 2.4 + 2.1 – 0.1 + 7.5 + 9.5 – 2.0 – 1.3 – 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 Q4
+ 4.1 + 2.5 – 1.4 + 2.2 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 1.3 – 0.8 – 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 2023 Q1
+ 6.2 + 4.1 – 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 3.8 + 0.3 + 0.5 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 Q2
+ 2.1 + 3.5 – 1.8 + 1.7 + 0.5 – 0.4 + 6.0 + 5.0 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 Q3
Short-term lending
+ 3.1 – 0.0 + 1.3 + 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.1 –2022 Q3
– 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.7 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.8 – 0.0 – 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.0 Q4
– 0.1 + 0.4 – 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.3 – –2023 Q1
– 1.0 + 0.0 – 0.8 – 0.6 – 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.0 – Q2
– 2.3 – 0.3 – 1.0 + 0.5 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 – Q3
Medium-term lending
+ 3.2 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 – + 0.0 + 0.0 2022 Q3
+ 4.6 + 0.1 + 2.4 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.7 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.6 – + 0.0 – 0.0 Q4
+ 2.1 – 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.7 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 1.6 – 0.8 – 0.7 – 0.7 – – 0.0 –2023 Q1
+ 2.3 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.7 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.4 – + 0.0 – 0.0 Q2
+ 0.5 + 0.6 – 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.4 – 0.4 + 0.1 – 0.1 – + 0.1 – 0.0 Q3
Long-term lending
+12.0 + 5.2 + 1.2 + 2.9 + 4.3 + 0.3 +20.0 +18.2 + 1.7 + 1.7 – + 0.2 + 0.1 2022 Q3
+ 9.3 + 4.6 + 0.5 + 1.9 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 9.1 + 9.9 – 0.9 – 0.7 – + 0.2 + 0.1 Q4
+ 2.1 + 2.2 – 2.0 + 0.8 + 0.9 – 0.1 + 1.9 + 2.1 – 0.2 – 0.1 – + 0.1 + 0.1 2023 Q1
+ 4.9 + 3.4 – 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.6 – 0.1 + 4.8 + 4.3 + 0.5 + 0.7 – + 0.1 + 0.0 Q2
+ 3.9 + 3.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.9 – 0.2 + 6.4 + 5.5 + 0.9 + 1.0 – + 0.0 + 0.0 Q3
are not specially marked.  1 Excluding fiduciary loans.  2 Including sole proprietors. 3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
34•
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year  2
PeriodDeposits,
totalSight
deposits Totalfor up
to and
including
1 year Totalfor up
to and
including
2 yearsfor more
than
2 yearsSavings
deposits  3Bank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)Liabilities
arising
from repos
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
2020 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 188.9 594.4 47.9 546.5 560.6 28.3 34.4 14.4 0.1
2021 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 161.0 574.9 49.7 525.2 561.2 24.5 34.2 17.1 1.3
2022 4,162.0 2,720.6 873.5 314.8 558.7 50.5 508.2 533.2 34.6 35.9 18.5 3.9
2022 Dec. 4,162.0 2,720.6 873.5 314.8 558.7 50.5 508.2 533.2 34.6 35.9 18.5 3.9
2023 Jan. 4,199.7 2,722.8 913.5 351.2 562.3 52.1 510.2 522.7 40.6 36.9 18.6 2.1
Feb. 4,197.1 2,687.7 947.9 381.5 566.4 54.2 512.3 516.0 45.5 37.2 18.7 2.9
Mar. 4,167.4 2,639.8 968.6 402.4 566.3 55.7 510.6 507.2 51.7 36.4 18.7 3.3
Apr. 4,167.3 2,632.0 978.5 408.7 569.7 59.4 510.3 498.6 58.3 36.5 18.9 3.0
May 4,172.9 2,623.9 993.0 419.3 573.6 61.7 511.9 490.6 65.4 36.6 20.4 4.1
June 4,176.3 2,600.9 1,020.0 445.4 574.6 64.4 510.2 483.3 72.1 36.5 20.3 2.8
July 4,180.2 2,582.2 1,042.9 468.5 574.4 65.8 508.6 475.9 79.1 36.7 19.9 3.5
Aug. 4,188.4 2,568.4 1,061.7 490.2 571.6 67.3 504.3 467.5 90.7 36.9 19.9 4.7
Sep. 4,189.3 2,558.0 1,072.5 497.7 574.8 71.5 503.3 461.8 97.0 37.1 19.9 6.5
Oct. 4,198.0 2,544.5 1,086.5 510.9 575.6 74.6 501.0 455.4 111.6 37.3 19.9 6.3
Nov. 4,217.3 2,552.9 1,085.6 506.9 578.6 76.7 501.9 448.3 130.5 37.6 20.8 6.4
Changes *
2021 + 95.3 +144.3 – 46.2 – 27.3 –18.9 + 1.5 –20.5 + 0.7 – 3.5 – 0.2 + 2.7 + 1.2
2022 +191.8 + 65.8 +143.4 +152.5 – 9.1 + 0.6 – 9.7 –27.5 +10.1 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 2.6
2022 Dec. – 43.4 – 47.1 + 4.2 + 5.2 – 1.0 + 3.7 – 4.7 – 3.7 + 3.2 + 1.1 + 0.0 – 0.6
2023 Jan. + 37.6 – 2.9 + 40.0 + 36.4 + 3.6 + 1.6 + 2.0 – 5.5 + 6.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 – 1.8
Feb. – 2.5 – 35.0 + 34.4 + 30.3 + 4.1 + 2.1 + 2.0 – 6.7 + 4.8 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.8
Mar. – 29.6 – 47.3 + 20.2 + 20.3 – 0.1 + 1.5 – 1.6 – 8.7 + 6.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.3
Apr. – 0.1 – 7.9 + 9.8 + 6.4 + 3.4 + 3.7 – 0.3 – 8.6 + 6.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.2
May + 5.6 – 7.9 + 14.5 + 10.5 + 3.9 + 2.3 + 1.6 – 8.0 + 7.1 + 0.1 + 1.6 + 1.1
June + 2.3 – 23.0 + 26.0 + 25.4 + 0.7 + 2.4 – 1.7 – 7.3 + 6.7 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 1.3
July + 3.8 – 18.7 + 22.8 + 23.1 – 0.3 + 1.4 – 1.7 – 7.3 + 7.0 + 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.7
Aug. + 8.2 – 13.2 + 21.3 + 21.3 + 0.0 + 1.9 – 1.8 – 8.5 + 8.5 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.2
Sep. + 0.9 – 10.5 + 10.7 + 8.0 + 2.7 + 3.9 – 1.2 – 5.7 + 6.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.8
Oct. + 8.7 – 13.4 + 14.0 + 13.2 + 0.8 + 3.1 – 2.3 – 6.4 +14.6 + 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.2
Nov. + 19.3 + 8.5 – 1.0 – 4.1 + 3.1 + 2.1 + 0.9 – 7.1 +18.8 + 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.2
Domestic government End of year or month *
2020 229.5 80.1 143.0 59.6 83.5 20.9 62.6 2.7 3.7 25.4 2.1 –
2021 210.1 82.4 121.9 42.0 79.9 23.8 56.1 2.5 3.3 25.8 2.0 1.0
2022 279.8 82.5 191.6 106.8 84.9 23.1 61.7 2.0 3.7 27.3 1.9 2.4
2022 Dec. 279.8 82.5 191.6 106.8 84.9 23.1 61.7 2.0 3.7 27.3 1.9 2.4
2023 Jan. 299.4 94.5 199.3 114.4 84.9 23.1 61.8 1.8 3.8 27.5 1.9 0.3
Feb. 317.8 101.4 211.0 123.3 87.6 23.9 63.8 1.7 3.8 27.5 1.9 1.3
Mar. 308.9 92.6 211.0 123.9 87.1 23.4 63.7 1.6 3.8 26.8 1.9 1.1
Apr. 295.1 85.4 204.4 116.3 88.1 24.7 63.4 1.5 3.8 26.8 1.9 1.4
May 300.1 92.2 202.7 115.0 87.7 24.3 63.4 1.3 3.9 26.8 1.9 1.7
June 308.1 95.9 207.0 119.2 87.7 24.2 63.5 1.2 4.0 26.6 1.8 0.5
July 298.3 85.7 207.5 121.1 86.4 23.0 63.4 1.1 4.0 26.7 1.8 0.8
Aug. 305.6 95.1 205.4 119.3 86.1 22.8 63.3 1.0 4.1 26.6 1.9 2.2
Sep. 304.9 94.2 205.6 119.5 86.2 23.9 62.2 0.9 4.2 26.4 1.8 3.8
Oct. 291.0 92.3 193.5 108.0 85.6 23.5 62.0 0.9 4.2 26.2 1.8 2.9
Nov. 285.2 92.5 187.5 103.7 83.8 22.1 61.7 0.9 4.4 26.0 1.8 2.2
Changes *
2021 – 17.9 + 3.4 – 20.8 – 17.7 – 3.0 + 2.9 – 6.0 – 0.2 – 0.4 + 0.4 – 0.0 + 1.0
2022 + 69.1 + 0.2 + 69.2 + 64.7 + 4.5 – 0.9 + 5.4 – 0.6 + 0.3 + 1.5 – 0.1 + 1.4
2022 Dec. – 24.7 – 23.5 – 1.1 – 2.8 + 1.7 + 2.4 – 0.7 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.7 – 0.0 –
2023 Jan. + 19.7 + 11.9 + 7.7 + 7.6 + 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 2.1
Feb. + 18.3 + 6.8 + 11.6 + 8.9 + 2.7 + 0.8 + 1.9 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 1.1
Mar. – 8.9 – 8.8 – 0.1 + 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.5 – 0.2 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.2
Apr. – 14.1 – 7.1 – 6.9 – 7.9 + 1.0 + 1.3 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.2
May + 5.0 + 6.6 – 1.6 – 1.3 – 0.4 – 0.4 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.4
June + 8.0 + 3.8 + 4.2 + 4.2 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 1.3
July – 9.8 – 10.2 + 0.5 + 1.8 – 1.3 – 1.2 – 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 – + 0.4
Aug. + 7.3 + 9.3 – 2.1 – 1.8 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 1.4
Sep. – 0.7 – 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 1.2 – 1.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 1.6
Oct. – 14.0 – 1.9 – 12.2 – 11.5 – 0.6 – 0.4 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.9
Nov. – 5.8 + 0.2 – 6.2 – 4.4 – 1.8 – 1.4 – 0.4 – 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.7
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt securities.
2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  3 Excluding
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
35•
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont´d)
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year  2
PeriodDeposits,
totalSight
deposits Totalfor up
to and
including
1 year Totalfor up
to and
including
2 yearsfor more
than
2 yearsSavings
deposits  3Bank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)Liabilities
arising
from repos
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month *
2020 3,655.7 2,432.9 640.3 129.3 511.0 27.0 483.9 557.9 24.6 9.0 12.3 0.1
2021 3,766.2 2,572.2 614.1 119.0 495.0 25.9 469.2 558.7 21.2 8.4 15.1 0.3
2022 3,882.2 2,638.1 681.9 208.0 473.9 27.4 446.5 531.2 31.0 8.6 16.6 1.5
2022 Dec. 3,882.2 2,638.1 681.9 208.0 473.9 27.4 446.5 531.2 31.0 8.6 16.6 1.5
2023 Jan. 3,900.2 2,628.3 714.2 236.8 477.4 29.0 448.4 520.9 36.8 9.4 16.7 1.9
Feb. 3,879.3 2,586.4 737.0 258.2 478.8 30.3 448.5 514.3 41.7 9.7 16.8 1.6
Mar. 3,858.5 2,547.3 757.6 278.4 479.2 32.3 446.9 505.7 47.9 9.7 16.9 2.2
Apr. 3,872.2 2,546.5 774.1 292.5 481.6 34.7 446.9 497.1 54.5 9.7 17.0 1.7
May 3,872.8 2,531.8 790.2 304.3 485.9 37.4 448.5 489.2 61.5 9.8 18.5 2.4
June 3,868.2 2,505.0 813.1 326.1 486.9 40.2 446.7 482.0 68.1 9.9 18.5 2.3
July 3,881.9 2,496.5 835.4 347.4 488.0 42.8 445.2 474.9 75.1 10.0 18.0 2.7
Aug. 3,882.8 2,473.4 856.4 370.9 485.5 44.5 441.0 466.5 86.6 10.3 18.0 2.4
Sep. 3,884.4 2,463.8 866.9 378.3 488.6 47.5 441.1 460.9 92.9 10.7 18.1 2.7
Oct. 3,907.1 2,452.2 892.9 402.9 490.0 51.0 439.0 454.5 107.4 11.2 18.1 3.4
Nov. 3,932.1 2,460.5 898.0 403.2 494.8 54.5 440.3 447.5 126.1 11.6 19.0 4.2
Changes *
2021 +113.2 +140.9 – 25.5 – 9.6 –15.9 – 1.4 –14.5 + 0.9 – 3.1 – 0.6 + 2.8 + 0.2
2022 +122.7 + 65.6 + 74.2 + 87.8 –13.6 + 1.4 –15.1 –27.0 + 9.8 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.3
2022 Dec. – 18.7 – 23.7 + 5.4 + 8.0 – 2.7 + 1.4 – 4.0 – 3.6 + 3.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 – 0.6
2023 Jan. + 17.9 – 14.9 + 32.3 + 28.7 + 3.6 + 1.7 + 1.9 – 5.3 + 5.8 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.3
Feb. – 20.8 – 41.9 + 22.8 + 21.4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.1 – 6.6 + 4.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 – 0.3
Mar. – 20.7 – 38.5 + 20.3 + 19.7 + 0.6 + 2.0 – 1.4 – 8.6 + 6.2 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.5
Apr. + 14.0 – 0.7 + 16.7 + 14.3 + 2.4 + 2.4 – 0.0 – 8.5 + 6.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.5
May + 0.6 – 14.6 + 16.1 + 11.8 + 4.3 + 2.7 + 1.6 – 7.9 + 7.1 + 0.0 + 1.6 + 0.7
June – 5.6 – 26.8 + 21.8 + 21.1 + 0.7 + 2.4 – 1.8 – 7.2 + 6.6 + 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1
July + 13.7 – 8.5 + 22.3 + 21.3 + 1.0 + 2.6 – 1.6 – 7.2 + 7.0 + 0.1 – 0.5 + 0.3
Aug. + 0.9 – 22.5 + 23.4 + 23.1 + 0.4 + 2.1 – 1.8 – 8.4 + 8.4 + 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.3
Sep. + 1.6 – 9.6 + 10.5 + 7.9 + 2.6 + 2.7 – 0.1 – 5.6 + 6.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2
Oct. + 22.7 – 11.6 + 26.1 + 24.7 + 1.5 + 3.5 – 2.0 – 6.4 +14.5 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.7
Nov. + 25.1 + 8.3 + 5.2 + 0.4 + 4.8 + 3.5 + 1.3 – 7.0 +18.7 + 0.5 + 0.9 + 0.9
of which: Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2020 1,116.1 719.1 381.7 89.2 292.5 15.0 277.5 5.8 9.4 2.3 9.7 0.1
2021 1,142.7 765.1 364.3 87.4 276.9 15.8 261.1 5.3 8.0 2.3 12.2 0.3
2022 1,193.5 783.4 397.1 140.8 256.3 16.8 239.5 4.4 8.6 1.9 13.5 1.5
2022 Dec. 1,193.5 783.4 397.1 140.8 256.3 16.8 239.5 4.4 8.6 1.9 13.5 1.5
2023 Jan. 1,220.2 792.5 414.7 156.8 257.9 17.1 240.8 4.3 8.7 2.0 13.5 1.9
Feb. 1,199.2 761.5 424.4 166.8 257.6 17.0 240.6 4.3 9.1 2.0 13.6 1.6
Mar. 1,192.4 749.3 429.7 174.1 255.5 16.8 238.8 4.1 9.3 1.9 13.6 2.2
Apr. 1,190.6 743.1 433.9 178.0 255.9 17.4 238.6 4.0 9.6 2.0 13.7 1.7
May 1,189.3 742.5 433.2 175.7 257.5 17.9 239.6 3.9 9.7 2.0 15.2 2.4
June 1,181.8 726.7 441.4 185.1 256.2 18.3 237.9 3.8 9.9 2.0 15.1 2.3
July 1,189.1 727.3 447.9 192.7 255.3 18.6 236.7 3.7 10.1 2.1 14.6 2.7
Aug. 1,189.2 719.9 452.0 202.1 249.9 18.0 231.9 3.7 13.6 2.2 14.6 2.4
Sep. 1,187.8 719.1 451.5 200.9 250.6 18.7 231.9 3.6 13.6 2.2 14.6 2.7
Oct. 1,209.6 727.6 464.5 215.8 248.7 19.2 229.5 3.5 14.0 2.3 14.6 3.4
Nov. 1,213.9 738.9 457.4 208.5 248.9 19.0 229.8 3.5 14.2 2.3 15.5 4.2
Changes *
2021 + 28.5 + 47.1 – 16.8 – 1.2 –15.7 + 0.5 –16.2 – 0.5 – 1.3 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 0.2
2022 + 56.2 + 17.7 + 38.8 + 52.1 –13.3 + 1.0 –14.3 – 0.9 + 0.6 – 0.5 + 1.0 + 1.3
2022 Dec. – 30.3 – 21.7 – 8.5 – 3.3 – 5.2 + 0.6 – 5.7 – 0.3 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.6
2023 Jan. + 26.5 + 9.0 + 17.4 + 15.9 + 1.5 + 0.3 + 1.3 – 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.3
Feb. – 21.0 – 31.0 + 9.7 + 10.0 – 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.4 – 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.3
Mar. – 6.6 – 11.8 + 5.1 + 6.9 – 1.8 – 0.2 – 1.6 – 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.5
Apr. – 1.6 – 6.2 + 4.5 + 4.1 + 0.4 + 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.5
May – 1.2 – 0.5 – 0.7 – 2.3 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 1.1 – 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.5 + 0.7
June – 8.5 – 15.9 + 7.3 + 8.9 – 1.6 + 0.1 – 1.7 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1
July + 7.2 + 0.6 + 6.5 + 7.5 – 1.1 + 0.3 – 1.4 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.5 + 0.3
Aug. + 0.1 – 6.8 + 6.6 + 9.1 – 2.5 – 0.3 – 2.2 – 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.3
Sep. – 1.3 – 0.7 – 0.5 – 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.5 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2
Oct. + 21.8 + 8.5 + 13.0 + 14.9 – 1.9 + 0.5 – 2.4 – 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.7
Nov. + 4.4 + 11.2 – 7.0 – 7.2 + 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.4 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.9
4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
36•
IV. Banks
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2
by creditor group by creditor group
Domestic households Domestic households
PeriodDeposits of
domestic
households
and
non-profit
institutions,
total Total TotalSelf-
employed
persons EmployeesOther
individualsDomestic
non-profit
institu-
tions Total TotalSelf-
employed
persons EmployeesOther
individuals
End of year or month *
2020 2,539.5 1,713.8 1,672.7 291.1 1,215.4 166.2 41.1 258.6 245.1 19.3 190.5 35.2
2021 2,623.6 1,807.1 1,762.4 308.6 1,288.4 165.4 44.7 249.8 237.8 18.2 185.6 33.9
2022 2,688.7 1,854.7 1,809.9 307.3 1,342.5 160.1 44.8 284.8 268.7 31.2 200.5 37.1
2023 June 2,686.4 1,778.3 1,736.0 282.4 1,302.6 151.1 42.3 371.7 351.9 52.1 256.8 43.1
July 2,692.8 1,769.2 1,728.2 285.8 1,293.2 149.1 41.0 387.5 367.2 56.1 267.2 43.9
Aug. 2,693.7 1,753.5 1,712.7 283.5 1,282.3 146.9 40.8 404.4 383.5 59.5 278.8 45.1
Sep. 2,696.6 1,744.6 1,703.7 275.8 1,280.8 147.1 40.9 415.3 394.0 61.2 286.9 46.0
Oct. 2,697.4 1,724.6 1,683.9 276.4 1,263.0 144.5 40.6 428.5 407.4 63.5 296.9 47.0
Nov. 2,718.2 1,721.6 1,681.1 273.3 1,264.5 143.3 40.5 440.6 420.1 64.9 307.4 47.8
Changes *
2021 + 84.7 +93.8 +90.3 +17.3 +73.7 – 0.6 + 3.5 – 8.6 – 7.2 – 1.1 – 4.7 –1.3
2022 + 66.5 +48.0 +47.8 – 1.5 +54.1 – 4.7 + 0.1 +35.4 +31.4 +12.9 +17.2 +1.2
2023 June + 2.9 –10.9 –10.4 – 7.6 – 2.2 – 0.6 – 0.5 +14.5 +14.7 + 3.3 +10.1 +1.3
July + 6.5 – 9.1 – 7.8 + 3.4 – 9.3 – 1.9 – 1.2 +15.8 +15.2 + 4.0 +10.4 +0.9
Aug. + 0.8 –15.7 –15.4 – 2.3 –11.0 – 2.2 – 0.3 +16.8 +16.3 + 3.4 +11.6 +1.2
Sep. + 2.9 – 8.9 – 9.1 – 7.7 – 1.5 + 0.2 + 0.2 +11.0 +10.6 + 1.7 + 8.0 +0.9
Oct. + 0.9 –20.1 –19.8 + 0.6 –17.8 – 2.5 – 0.3 +13.1 +13.4 + 2.3 +10.1 +1.0
Nov. + 20.7 – 2.9 – 2.8 – 3.0 + 1.4 – 1.2 – 0.2 +12.1 +12.7 + 1.4 +10.4 +0.8
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional.Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
marked.  1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group *
€ billion
Deposits
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
PeriodDomestic
government,
total TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans
End of year or month *
2020 229.5 48.6 4.8 7.2 36.5 0.0 11.3 46.5 21.2 11.4 13.2 0.7 14.1
2021 210.1 43.5 4.2 3.2 36.0 0.1 11.7 47.4 21.7 13.8 11.3 0.6 14.1
2022 279.8 66.8 7.9 24.2 34.6 0.1 11.4 53.8 17.1 25.2 10.9 0.5 15.9
2023 June 308.1 64.0 13.8 13.8 36.5 0.0 11.1 70.0 23.9 34.9 10.7 0.5 15.5
July 298.3 61.5 11.6 13.5 36.3 0.0 11.1 68.5 21.6 35.9 10.7 0.4 15.5
Aug. 305.6 61.5 11.8 13.5 36.2 0.0 11.2 65.2 22.1 32.1 10.6 0.4 15.4
Sep. 304.9 60.0 11.1 13.7 35.1 0.0 11.1 72.0 25.0 36.0 10.6 0.4 15.2
Oct. 291.0 59.7 14.6 10.0 35.1 0.0 11.1 62.5 20.8 30.7 10.6 0.4 15.0
Nov. 285.2 55.1 12.7 7.4 34.9 0.0 11.3 51.2 18.7 21.6 10.4 0.4 14.7
Changes *
2021 –17.9 –5.0 –0.5 –4.1 –0.4 +0.0 +0.3 +1.0 +0.6 +2.3 –1.8 –0.1 +0.0
2022 +69.1 +23.0 +3.5 +20.9 –1.4 –0.0 –0.3 +6.4 –4.6 +11.3 –0.3 –0.1 +1.8
2023 June + 8.0 +1.6 +4.1 –2.7 +0.2 – –0.2 +10.5 +5.3 +5.3 –0.1 –0.0 +0.0
July – 9.8 –2.5 –2.1 –0.2 –0.1 – +0.0 –1.4 –2.3 +1.0 –0.1 –0.0 +0.0
Aug. + 7.3 –0.0 +0.2 –0.1 –0.2 +0.0 +0.0 –3.3 +0.6 –3.8 –0.1 +0.0 –0.1
Sep. – 0.7 –1.5 –0.7 +0.3 –1.1 –0.0 –0.0 +6.8 +2.9 +3.9 – –0.0 –0.2
Oct. –14.0 –0.3 +3.5 –3.8 –0.0 – –0.0 –9.4 –4.2 –5.3 +0.1 –0.0 –0.2
Nov. – 5.8 –4.6 –1.9 –2.5 –0.2 +0.0 +0.1 –11.5 –2.0 –9.3 –0.2 +0.0 –0.3
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, East German Railways and Federal
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and DeutscheTelekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises ”.
Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date
are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
37•
IV. Banks
Savings deposits  3 Memo item:
by maturity
more than 1 year  2
of which:
Domestic
non-profit
institu-
tionsup to and
including
1 year Totalup to and
including
2 yearsmore than
2 years TotalDomestic
householdsDomestic
non-profit
institu-
tionsBank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)  5Liabilities
arising
from repos Period
End of year or month *
13.5 40.1 218.5 12.0 206.5 552.0 545.7 6.3 15.1 6.7 2.7 –2020
12.0 31.7 218.1 10.1 208.0 553.4 547.2 6.2 13.2 6.1 2.8 –2021
16.0 67.2 217.5 10.6 206.9 526.8 521.8 5.1 22.4 6.8 3.1 –2022
19.7 141.0 230.7 21.9 208.8 478.2 474.0 4.2 58.2 7.8 3.4 –2023 June
20.3 154.8 232.7 24.1 208.6 471.1 467.1 4.0 65.0 7.9 3.4 – July
20.9 168.7 235.6 26.6 209.0 462.8 458.9 3.9 73.0 8.2 3.4 – Aug.
21.3 177.3 238.0 28.9 209.1 457.3 453.5 3.8 79.3 8.5 3.4 – Sep.
21.0 187.1 241.3 31.8 209.5 451.0 447.3 3.7 93.4 8.9 3.5 – Oct.
20.5 194.6 245.9 35.5 210.4 444.0 440.5 3.5 111.9 9.3 3.5 – Nov.
Changes *
– 1.4 – 8.4 – 0.2 –1.9 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 1.5 –0.1 – 1.9 –0.6 + 0.2 –2021
+ 4.0 + 35.7 – 0.3 +0.5 – 0.8 –26.1 –25.0 –1.1 + 9.2 +0.7 + 0.3 –2022
– 0.1 + 12.2 + 2.3 +2.4 – 0.1 – 7.1 – 7.0 –0.1 + 6.3 +0.1 + 0.0 –2023 June
+ 0.6 + 13.8 + 2.1 +2.3 – 0.2 – 7.1 – 6.9 –0.2 + 6.8 +0.1 + 0.0 – July
+ 0.6 + 14.0 + 2.9 +2.5 + 0.4 – 8.3 – 8.2 –0.1 + 8.0 +0.3 + 0.0 – Aug.
+ 0.4 + 8.6 + 2.4 +2.3 + 0.2 – 5.5 – 5.4 –0.1 + 6.3 +0.3 + 0.0 – Sep.
– 0.3 + 9.8 + 3.4 +3.0 + 0.4 – 6.3 – 6.2 –0.1 +14.1 +0.4 + 0.0 – Oct.
– 0.5 + 7.5 + 4.6 +3.7 + 0.9 – 7.0 – 6.8 –0.2 +18.5 +0.4 + 0.1 – Nov.
registered debt securities.  2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Table IV.12).  3 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see alsofootnote 2).  4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
5 Included in time deposits.
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2,4Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
68.5 43.2 8.0 12.4 4.9 0.0 66.0 10.9 32.9 21.4 0.8 –2020
70.9 48.5 6.0 12.0 4.4 0.0 48.3 8.0 19.0 20.5 0.8 –2021
80.0 49.2 12.5 13.8 4.4 0.0 79.2 8.3 44.9 25.5 0.6 –2022
75.1 38.3 18.6 14.1 4.0 0.0 99.0 19.9 51.9 26.4 0.7 –2023 June
70.8 34.3 18.5 14.2 3.9 0.0 97.4 18.2 53.2 25.3 0.7 – July
78.9 40.8 20.1 14.2 3.8 0.0 100.0 20.4 53.7 25.1 0.9 – Aug.
75.0 37.4 19.7 14.2 3.7 0.0 97.9 20.7 50.0 26.3 0.9 – Sep.
72.8 35.9 19.2 14.0 3.8 0.0 95.9 21.0 48.2 25.8 0.9 – Oct.
79.5 42.1 19.5 14.1 3.8 0.0 99.5 18.9 55.2 24.4 1.0 – Nov.
Changes *
+2.8 +5.6 – 2.0 –0.2 – 0.5 – –16.8 –2.2 –13.9 –0.6 + 0.1 –2021
+10.2 +0.9 + 7.9 +1.3 + 0.1 – +29.6 +0.3 +24.5 +4.9 – 0.2 –2022
–5.1 –5.4 + 0.4 –0.1 + 0.0 – + 0.9 –0.2 + 1.1 –0.0 – 0.0 –2023 June
–4.3 –4.0 – 0.2 +0.1 – 0.1 – – 1.6 –1.7 + 1.3 –1.2 – 0.0 – July
+8.1 +6.5 + 1.6 +0.0 – 0.0 – + 2.6 +2.1 + 0.5 –0.1 + 0.1 – Aug.
–3.9 –3.4 – 0.4 –0.0 – 0.1 – – 2.1 +0.3 – 3.6 +1.2 + 0.0 – Sep.
–2.2 –1.5 – 0.6 –0.2 + 0.0 – – 2.0 +0.3 – 1.9 –0.5 + 0.0 – Oct.
+6.7 +6.3 + 0.3 +0.1 + 0.0 – + 3.6 –2.2 + 7.1 –1.4 + 0.1 – Nov.
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Federal Railways Fund,
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund,
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund.  2 Including liabilities arising fromnon-negotiable bearer debt securities.  3 Including deposits under savings and loan
contracts.  4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
38•
IV. Banks
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at 3 months'
noticeat more than 3
months' notice
Period Total Total Totalof which:
Special
savings
facilities  2 Totalof which:
Special
savings
facilities  2 Totalof which:
At 3
months'
noticeMemo
item:
Interest
credited
on
savings
depositsnon-banks,
total Totalof which:
With
maturities
of more
than
2 yearsforeign
non-banks
End of year or month *
2020 566.8 560.6 533.3 288.0 27.3 18.0 6.3 5.7 1.8 30.2 28.3 22.1 1.9
2021 567.1 561.2 537.1 269.0 24.1 14.8 5.9 5.4 1.5 24.7 24.5 19.5 0.2
2022 538.5 533.2 510.3 254.2 22.9 14.2 5.3 4.8 1.4 34.9 34.6 20.8 0.2
2023 July 480.7 475.9 439.9 202.7 36.0 28.2 4.8 4.2 0.1 79.7 79.1 26.1 0.6
Aug. 472.2 467.5 428.8 198.2 38.7 30.9 4.7 4.1 0.1 91.4 90.7 29.6 0.6
Sep. 466.5 461.8 420.2 195.2 41.6 33.9 4.7 4.0 0.1 97.8 97.0 30.3 0.7
Oct. 460.1 455.4 410.8 191.6 44.6 37.0 4.7 3.9 0.1 112.4 111.6 31.7 0.8
Nov. 452.9 448.3 400.3 188.8 48.1 40.5 4.6 3.8 0.1 131.3 130.5 33.8 0.9
Changes *
2021 +0.3 +0.7 +3.9 –18.5 –3.2 –3.2 –0.4 –0.3 . –5.2 –3.5 –2.3 –1.7
2022 –28.1 –27.5 –26.4 –14.6 –1.2 –0.6 –0.6 –0.6 . +10.2 +10.1 +1.3 +0.1
2023 July –7.4 –7.3 –10.3 –3.3 +3.0 +3.1 –0.0 –0.1 . +7.1 +7.0 +0.8 +0.1
Aug. –8.5 –8.5 –11.2 –4.5 +2.7 +2.8 –0.0 –0.1 . +8.6 +8.5 +1.0 +0.1
Sep. –5.7 –5.7 –8.6 –3.0 +2.9 +3.0 –0.0 –0.1 . +6.4 +6.3 +0.6 +0.1
Oct. –6.4 –6.4 –9.4 –3.7 +3.0 +3.1 –0.0 –0.1 . +14.7 +14.6 +1.4 +0.1
Nov. –7.1 –7.1 –10.5 –2.7 +3.4 +3.5 –0.1 –0.1 . +18.9 +18.8 +2.1 +0.1
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified as timedeposits.  2 Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or
basic rate of interest.  3 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
securities.
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper
of which:
with maturities ofNon-negotiable
bearer debt
securities and
money market
paper  6 Subordinated
up to
and including 1 yearmore than 1 year up to
and including 2 years
Period TotalFloating
rate
bonds  1Zero
coupon
bonds  1,2Foreign
currency
bonds  3,4Certifi-
cates
of
deposit Totalof which:
without
a nominal
guarantee  5Totalof which:
without
a nominal
guarantee  5more
than
2 years Totalof which:
with
maturities
of more
than
2 yearsnegotiable
debt
securitiesnon-
negotiable
debt
securities
End of year or month *
2020 1,119.0 117.1 12.7 313.6 89.4 94.3 1.5 23.8 3.1 1,000.9 1.1 0.9 34.8 0.4
2021 1,173.6 106.8 13.5 331.4 98.7 106.8 1.9 18.0 4.5 1,048.8 0.9 0.7 34.6 0.1
2022 1,231.5 92.8 15.0 307.8 88.6 98.6 1.4 26.6 3.4 1,106.4 0.8 0.7 37.8 0.1
2023 July 1,297.0 84.0 15.9 298.6 91.1 112.8 1.5 36.7 3.4 1,147.5 0.5 0.5 38.2 0.1
Aug. 1,308.5 82.6 15.4 298.3 98.5 121.4 1.6 37.4 3.5 1,149.7 0.5 0.5 38.2 0.1
Sep. 1,314.3 82.7 14.4 310.5 90.8 114.0 1.5 39.5 3.5 1,160.9 0.5 0.5 37.2 0.1
Oct. 1,313.8 83.4 16.2 304.0 78.7 104.1 1.6 43.8 3.5 1,165.9 0.0 0.0 37.8 0.1
Nov. 1,322.3 88.4 16.0 312.6 89.7 114.2 1.6 42.9 3.6 1,165.2 0.0 0.0 37.5 0.1
Changes *
2021 +54.0 –10.3 +0.8 +17.6 +9.4 +12.6 + 0.4 –5.9 +1.3 +47.3 +0.4 +0.3 –0.2 –0.3
2022 +59.1 –12.7 +1.1 –23.6 –9.9 –8.3 – 0.5 +8.5 –1.1 +58.9 –0.1 +0.1 +3.5 –
2023 July + 2.5 –0.0 +1.2 –1.0 –7.3 –5.3 + 0.1 +0.8 +0.1 +7.0 –0.0 –0.0 +0.5 –
Aug. +11.5 –1.4 –0.4 –0.3 +7.4 +8.7 + 0.1 +0.7 +0.1 +2.2 +0.0 +0.0 +0.0 –
Sep. + 5.9 +0.1 –1.0 +12.2 –7.6 –7.5 – 0.0 +2.1 –0.0 +11.2 +0.0 +0.0 –1.0 –
Oct. – 1.0 +0.7 +1.3 –7.0 –12.2 –9.9 + 0.0 +4.3 +0.1 +4.6 +0.0 –0.0 +0.6 –
Nov. + 8.5 +5.0 –0.2 +8.6 +11.1 +10.1 + 0.0 –0.9 +0.0 –0.7 – – –0.3 –
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Including debt securities denominated in foreign currencies.  2 Issue value when
floated.  3 Including floating rate notes and zero coupon bonds denominated in foreigncurrencies.  4 Bonds denominated in non-euro area currencies.  5 Negotiable bearer debt
securities and money market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%.
6 Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see
also Table IV.10, footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
39•
IV. Banks
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany *
Interim statements
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks
(MFIs)  6Deposits of non-
banks (non-MFIs)
Building loans
End of
year/monthNum-
ber
of
associ-
ationsBalance
sheet
total  1Credit
bal-
ances
and
loans
(ex-
cluding
building
loans)  2Building
loans  3Bank
debt
secur-
ities  4Loans
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsInterim
and
bridging
loansOther
building
loansSecur-
ities (in-
cluding
Treasury
bills
and
Treasury
discount
paper)  5Deposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsSight
and time
depositsDeposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsSight and
time de-
posits  7Bearer
debt
secur-
ities
out-
stand-
ingCapital
(includ-
ing pub-
lished
re-
serves)  8Memo
item:
New
con-
tracts
entered
into in
year or
month  9
All building and loan associations
2022 18 259.7 30.6 0.0 15.4 11.1 135.0 40.5 22.9 2.5 36.1 185.3 9.3 5.2 12.3 91.3
2023 Sep. 17 258.8 25.9 0.1 15.8 14.5 135.0 41.1 22.2 1.4 35.7 183.3 10.3 6.1 13.0 7.3
Oct. 16 258.4 25.3 0.1 15.8 14.9 134.9 41.2 22.0 1.3 36.0 182.9 10.3 6.1 13.0 7.6
Nov. 15 258.8 25.4 0.1 15.7 15.3 134.9 41.3 21.9 1.2 36.2 182.4 10.5 6.6 13.0 7.4
Private building and Ioan associations
2023 Sep. 10 181.7 11.7 0.1 8.6 9.9 104.7 35.0 8.9 0.6 32.3 117.9 10.0 6.1 8.9 4.8
Oct. 9 181.4 11.2 0.1 8.6 10.2 104.5 35.1 8.9 0.5 32.6 117.6 10.0 6.1 8.9 5.1
Nov. 9 181.9 11.3 0.1 8.6 10.4 104.5 35.2 8.9 0.5 32.9 117.2 10.2 6.6 8.9 5.0
Public building and Ioan associations
2023 Sep. 7 77.1 14.2 0.0 7.2 4.5 30.3 6.1 13.2 0.8 3.4 65.3 0.3 – 4.1 2.5
Oct. 7 77.1 14.2 0.0 7.2 4.7 30.3 6.1 13.1 0.7 3.4 65.3 0.3 – 4.1 2.5
Nov. 6 76.9 14.1 0.0 7.1 4.9 30.3 6.1 13.0 0.7 3.3 65.2 0.3 – 4.1 2.5
Trends in building and loan association business
€ billion
Capital promised Capital disbursed Changes in deposits
under savings and
loan contracts AllocationsDisbursement
commitments
outstanding at
end of periodInterest and
repayments
received on
building loans  11
Deposits under
savings and
loan contractsLoans under
savings and
loan contracts  10
PeriodAmounts
paid into
savings
and
loan ac-
counts  10Interest
credited
on
deposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsRepay-
ments
of
deposits
under
cancelled
savings
and
loan
con-
tracts Totalof
which:
Net
alloca-
tions  12 Total Totalof which:
Applied
to settle-
ment of
interim
and
bridging
loans Totalof which:
Applied
to settle-
ment of
interim
and
bridging
loansNewly
granted
interim
and
bridging
loans
and
other
building
loans Totalof
which:
Under
alloc-
ated
con-
tracts Totalof
which:
Repay-
ments
during
quarterMemo
item:
Housing
bonuses
re-
ceived  13
All building and loan associations
2022 27.5 2.0 8.7 51.5 30.7 48.5 20.2 4.1 5.3 3.8 23.0 16.4 6.7 5.4 4.1 0.2
2023 Sep. 2.1 0.1 0.5 4.2 3.2 4.1 2.1 0.4 0.7 0.4 1.3 13.4 7.2 0.4 1.0 0.0
Oct. 2.1 0.1 0.5 4.5 3.5 4.3 2.2 0.4 0.9 0.4 1.2 13.1 7.2 0.4 . 0.0
Nov. 2.2 0.1 0.4 4.6 3.6 4.2 2.3 0.4 0.8 0.4 1.2 13.0 7.3 0.4 . 0.0
Private building and Ioan associations
2023 Sep. 1.4 0.1 0.3 2.9 2.2 2.9 1.5 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.0 9.0 4.0 0.3 0.7 0.0
Oct. 1.4 0.1 0.3 3.2 2.4 3.1 1.6 0.3 0.6 0.3 0.9 8.7 3.9 0.3 . 0.0
Nov. 1.4 0.1 0.2 3.1 2.3 3.0 1.6 0.3 0.5 0.3 0.9 8.6 3.9 0.3 . 0.0
Public building and Ioan associations
2023 Sep. 0.8 0.0 0.2 1.2 1.0 1.2 0.6 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.4 3.3 0.1 0.3 0.0
Oct. 0.8 0.0 0.2 1.3 1.1 1.2 0.6 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.4 3.3 0.1 . 0.0
Nov. 0.8 0.0 0.2 1.5 1.3 1.3 0.7 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.4 3.4 0.1 . 0.0
* Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures for
the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which
appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 See Table IV.2,
footnote 1.  2 Including claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from
registered debt securities and central bank credit balances.  3 Loans under savings and
loan contracts and interim and bridging loans.  4 Including money market paper and
small amounts of other securities issued by banks.  5 Including equalisation claims.
6 Including liabilities to building and loan associations.  7 Including small amounts of
savings deposits.  8 Including participation rights capital and fund for general bankingrisks. 9 Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as
new contracts.  10 For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
arising from the allocation of contracts see "Capital disbursed".  11 Including housing
bonuses credited.  12 Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans.  13 The amounts already
credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in "Amounts paid into
savings and loan accounts" and "Interest and repayments received on building loans".

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
40•
IV. Banks
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other assets  7
Credit balances and loans Loans
PeriodGerman
banks
(MFIs)
with
foreign
branches
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diaries 
 
foreign
branches  1
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diariesBalance
sheet
total  7 Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2,3 Total Totalto
German
non-
banksto
foreign
non-
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2 Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio
Foreign branches                                               End of year or month *
2020 50 206 1,552.2 376.7 364.0 213.2 150.8 12.7 504.8 409.6 14.3 395.3 95.2 670.7 523.6
2021 51 207 1,504.5 471.2 457.8 297.9 159.9 13.4 497.2 418.8 12.9 405.9 78.4 536.1 404.5
2022 47 202 1,625.5 461.8 447.4 315.6 131.8 14.4 516.7 447.7 9.7 437.9 69.0 647.0 513.3
2023 Jan. 47 201 1,638.4 503.3 488.3 346.1 142.2 14.9 510.1 439.4 9.5 429.9 70.7 625.0 462.3
Feb. 47 200 1,663.9 493.1 477.4 337.8 139.6 15.6 509.2 440.0 9.6 430.5 69.2 661.6 509.3
Mar. 47 199 1,565.2 471.2 454.2 313.9 140.3 17.0 500.4 432.5 9.3 423.2 67.9 593.7 437.7
Apr. 47 196 1,566.1 470.6 453.1 312.2 141.0 17.4 499.2 432.1 8.6 423.5 67.1 596.3 440.8
May 47 201 1,616.3 478.9 459.4 310.3 149.1 19.5 506.8 434.7 6.3 428.3 72.1 630.7 462.3
June 47 200 1,623.2 466.6 447.7 298.0 149.7 18.9 496.6 426.5 6.1 420.4 70.1 660.1 492.7
July 48 202 1,649.4 491.3 471.2 319.0 152.2 20.1 496.6 423.3 5.9 417.4 73.3 661.6 491.4
Aug. 48 202 1,663.5 483.7 463.8 312.6 151.2 19.9 499.1 424.2 6.1 418.1 74.9 680.8 502.7
Sep. 48 201 1,680.8 488.5 468.9 315.9 153.1 19.6 496.6 420.9 6.4 414.5 75.7 695.7 513.6
Oct. 48 201 1,693.0 477.0 457.2 306.9 150.3 19.8 499.7 420.5 6.0 414.5 79.2 716.3 529.9
Changes *
2021 +1 +1 –48.4 +87.3 +87.1 +84.9 +2.2 +0.3 –26.2 –6.5 –1.3 –5.1 –19.7 –136.9 –128.1
2022 –4 –5 +124.1 –13.3 –14.3 +17.8 –32.1 +1.0 +6.7 +17.5 –3.2 +20.6 –10.8 +108.1 +103.0
2023 Feb. ±0 –1 +24.5 –11.7 –12.4 –8.3 –4.1 +0.7 –5.7 –3.7 +0.1 –3.8 –2.0 + 35.6 +46.2
Mar. ±0 –1 –97.4 –20.0 –21.3 –24.0 +2.6 +1.3 –2.9 –2.3 –0.3 –2.0 –0.7 – 66.6 –70.4
Apr. ±0 –3 +1.3 +0.4 –0.0 –1.7 +1.6 +0.5 +1.6 +2.1 –0.7 +2.8 –0.5 + 3.1 + 3.5
May ±0 +5 +48.9 +5.8 +3.8 –1.9 +5.7 +2.1 +0.6 –3.7 –2.3 –1.4 +4.3 + 33.0 +20.1
June ±0 –1 +7.8 –10.5 –9.9 –12.3 +2.4 –0.6 –6.1 –4.5 –0.3 –4.2 –1.6 + 30.3 +31.2
July +1 +2 +22.9 +24.1 +22.8 +19.5 +3.3 +1.2 +1.3 –2.2 –0.2 –2.0 +3.5 + 1.7 – 0.7
Aug. ±0 – +13.4 –8.7 –8.5 –6.4 –2.1 –0.2 –0.7 –1.9 +0.2 –2.1 +1.2 + 18.5 +10.7
Sep. ±0 –1 +16.1 +2.8 +3.1 +3.3 –0.1 –0.3 –8.4 –8.7 +0.4 –9.0 +0.3 + 13.7 + 9.7
Oct. ±0 – +12.3 –11.0 –11.2 –8.9 –2.3 +0.2 +4.4 +0.7 –0.4 +1.2 +3.6 + 20.8 +16.6
Foreign subsidiaries                                           End of year or month *
2020 12 36 229.5 44.8 39.9 17.4 22.5 4.9 139.7 114.4 13.1 101.4 25.3 44.9 0.0
2021 12 35 246.0 50.8 44.4 20.7 23.7 6.3 139.5 116.3 12.6 103.7 23.2 55.7 0.0
2022 11 32 256.7 61.5 52.0 20.5 31.4 9.5 145.8 124.5 13.3 111.2 21.3 49.4 0.0
2023 Jan. 11 32 253.0 60.0 49.9 20.0 29.9 10.1 145.3 124.5 13.3 111.3 20.7 47.8 0.0
Feb. 11 32 254.8 60.7 50.6 22.4 28.2 10.1 146.1 125.4 13.4 111.9 20.7 47.9 0.0
Mar. 11 32 253.9 62.2 51.7 20.7 31.0 10.5 146.5 126.2 13.3 112.9 20.2 45.2 0.0
Apr. 11 31 250.9 64.4 53.3 22.4 30.9 11.1 145.3 125.6 13.0 112.6 19.8 41.2 0.0
May 11 31 250.9 59.3 48.8 21.5 27.2 10.5 146.2 126.3 12.8 113.5 19.9 45.5 0.0
June 12 32 253.3 64.2 52.8 22.4 30.4 11.5 146.6 126.7 12.7 113.9 19.9 42.5 0.0
July 12 31 253.4 63.6 52.2 23.0 29.3 11.4 147.4 126.9 12.9 114.1 20.5 42.4 0.0
Aug. 12 31 252.8 62.8 52.2 21.9 30.3 10.6 146.0 125.6 12.7 112.9 20.4 44.1 0.0
Sep. 12 31 256.2 66.4 56.0 25.0 31.0 10.5 146.7 125.8 12.3 113.5 20.9 43.0 0.0
Oct. 12 31 257.4 65.8 56.0 24.5 31.5 9.8 146.8 126.2 12.0 114.2 20.6 44.8 0.0
Changes *
2021 ±0 –1 +12.0 +3.8 +2.8 +3.4 –0.5 +1.0 –2.5 –0.5 –0.5 –0.0 –2.1 + 10.8 ± 0.0
2022 –1 –3 +6.5 +8.2 +5.2 –0.2 +5.6 +2.8 +5.0 +6.9 +0.7 +6.3 –1.9 – 6.5 ± 0.0
2023 Feb. – – +0.6 +0.3 +0.4 +2.4 –2.1 –0.1 +0.2 +0.2 +0.2 +0.0 –0.0 + 0.1 ± 0.0
Mar. – – +0.4 +2.0 +1.5 –1.7 +3.2 +0.6 +1.1 +1.6 –0.1 +1.7 –0.5 – 2.7 ± 0.0
Apr. – –1 –2.7 +2.2 +1.6 +1.7 –0.1 +0.6 –0.8 –0.4 –0.3 –0.1 –0.5 – 4.1 ± 0.0
May – – –1.5 –5.7 –4.9 –0.8 –4.1 –0.7 –0.1 –0.3 –0.2 –0.0 +0.1 + 4.3 ± 0.0
June +1 +1 +3.2 +5.3 +4.2 +0.9 +3.3 +1.0 +0.9 +0.9 –0.0 +0.9 +0.0 – 3.0 ± 0.0
July – –1 +0.6 –0.5 –0.4 +0.6 –1.0 –0.1 +1.2 +0.7 +0.1 +0.5 +0.6 – 0.1 ± 0.0
Aug. – – –1.2 –1.0 –0.2 –1.0 +0.8 –0.9 –1.8 –1.7 –0.2 –1.5 –0.1 + 1.7 ± 0.0
Sep. – – +2.2 +3.2 +3.5 +3.0 +0.5 –0.2 –0.0 –0.5 –0.4 –0.1 +0.5 – 1.0 ± 0.0
Oct. – – +1.4 –0.6 +0.1 –0.4 +0.5 –0.7 +0.2 +0.5 –0.3 +0.8 –0.3 + 1.8 ± 0.0
* In this table "foreign" also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated fromthe flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are always
to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following
Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Several branches in a given country of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
41•
IV. Banks
Deposits Other liabilities  6,7
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4
Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banks Total Total 
Shortterm 
Medium
and
longtermForeign
non-banksMoney
market
paper
and debt
securities
outstand-
ing 5Working
capital
and own
funds Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio Period
End of year or month *                  Foreign branches
872.2 588.5 431.8 156.7 283.7 11.7 10.2 1.5 272.0 61.5 49.9 568.6 523.1 2020
950.2 638.5 461.2 177.3 311.7 8.1 6.3 1.8 303.6 65.2 51.3 437.9 403.4 2021
943.4 573.6 435.2 138.5 369.8 10.4 8.9 1.5 359.4 61.7 63.1 557.4 512.9 2022
985.2 595.5 432.8 162.6 389.7 9.5 8.3 1.2 380.2 85.2 63.2 504.8 462.6 2023 Jan.
960.9 578.2 420.7 157.5 382.7 9.0 7.8 1.2 373.7 87.3 63.5 552.1 509.9 Feb.
950.4 574.0 425.9 148.1 376.3 7.8 6.6 1.2 368.6 71.7 63.4 479.7 439.4 Mar.
940.7 561.4 407.2 154.2 379.3 7.5 6.3 1.2 371.8 79.9 62.9 482.6 442.1 Apr.
958.9 576.0 416.7 159.4 382.9 7.8 6.5 1.2 375.1 81.4 63.4 512.7 462.9 May
946.8 571.3 412.7 158.6 375.5 7.8 6.6 1.2 367.7 68.6 65.2 542.6 493.9 June
966.6 577.8 416.3 161.5 388.8 7.7 6.5 1.2 381.0 76.1 65.1 541.7 492.8 July
965.4 581.8 423.8 158.0 383.5 8.3 7.0 1.3 375.3 78.9 65.4 553.8 503.1 Aug.
963.9 571.6 418.7 152.9 392.3 11.0 9.6 1.4 381.3 84.4 66.0 566.5 513.9 Sep.
958.1 572.8 421.2 151.6 385.3 11.0 9.5 1.4 374.3 82.9 66.0 586.0 530.5 Oct.
Changes *
+71.1 +43.1 +31.0 +12.0 + 28.1 – 3.6 – 3.9 + 0.3 +31.7 + 0.1 + 1.4 –130.8 – 119.7 2021
– 6.2 –64.2 –22.2 –42.0 + 58.0 + 2.3 + 2.6 – 0.3 +55.7 – 6.3 +11.8 +119.0 + 109.5 2022
–26.5 –19.3 –12.2 –7.1 – 7.2 – 0.5 – 0.5 + 0.0 – 6.7 + 1.1 +0.4 + 47.2 + 47.3 2023 Feb.
– 7.8 –1.8 +5.2 –7.0 – 6.0 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 5.8 –14.3 –0.2 – 72.3 – 70.5 Mar.
– 8.3 –11.4 –18.7 +7.3 + 3.1 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 3.4 + 8.6 –0.5 + 2.9 + 2.7 Apr.
+15.1 +11.7 +9.4 +2.3 + 3.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 3.1 + 0.1 +0.5 + 30.0 + 20.8 May
– 9.8 –2.5 –3.9 +1.4 – 7.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 7.3 –11.9 +1.9 + 29.9 + 31.0 June
+17.8 +5.9 +1.7 +4.3 +11.9 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.0 +12.0 + 8.0 –0.1 – 1.4 – 1.1 July
– 2.6 +2.9 +7.6 –4.8 – 5.4 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 – 5.8 + 2.2 +0.3 + 12.1 + 10.3 Aug.
– 4.2 –12.7 –5.1 –7.6 + 8.4 + 2.7 + 2.7 + 0.1 + 5.7 + 4.2 +0.6 + 12.8 + 10.8 Sep.
– 5.2 +1.7 +2.5 –0.8 – 6.9 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 6.9 – 1.3 +0.0 + 19.4 + 16.6 Oct.
End of year or month * Foreign subsidiaries
163.4 59.6 34.1 25.5 103.8 6.7 4.2 2.5 97.1 16.6 20.3 29.2 0.0 2020
178.6 64.2 33.0 31.2 114.4 7.3 4.9 2.4 107.1 16.4 20.3 30.7 0.0 2021
189.4 67.5 38.6 28.9 122.0 6.9 4.6 2.3 115.1 13.5 20.1 33.7 0.0 2022
186.2 66.7 38.5 28.2 119.6 7.0 4.5 2.5 112.6 12.8 20.1 33.9 0.0 2023 Jan.
187.2 69.3 40.3 29.1 117.9 6.9 4.4 2.5 110.9 12.7 20.2 34.7 0.0 Feb.
186.6 71.2 42.2 29.1 115.4 6.8 4.3 2.5 108.5 12.3 20.3 34.8 0.0 Mar.
183.5 71.0 44.0 27.0 112.5 6.9 4.5 2.5 105.6 12.2 20.2 35.0 0.0 Apr.
183.9 71.2 43.6 27.6 112.8 6.9 4.4 2.5 105.9 12.1 20.6 34.3 0.0 May
185.6 71.9 45.4 26.5 113.7 6.6 4.2 2.4 107.1 10.6 20.5 36.6 0.0 June
187.9 72.3 47.0 25.3 115.6 6.8 4.4 2.4 108.8 10.5 20.5 34.4 0.0 July
185.5 70.6 46.0 24.7 114.8 6.6 4.2 2.4 108.2 10.3 20.6 36.4 0.0 Aug.
188.2 74.1 49.1 25.1 114.1 6.7 4.3 2.4 107.4 11.3 20.5 36.0 0.0 Sep.
189.3 73.1 48.3 24.8 116.2 6.5 4.1 2.4 109.7 11.6 20.8 35.8 0.0 Oct.
Changes *
+12.1 + 3.2 – 1.1 + 4.3 + 8.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 – 0.1 + 8.3 – 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 ± 0.0 2021
+ 7.7 + 1.4 + 5.6 – 4.2 + 6.3 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.1 + 6.7 – 2.9 – 0.2 + 2.2 ± 0.0 2022
+ 0.1 +2.4 +1.8 +0.6 – 2.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 2.2 – 0.1 +0.1 + 0.5 ± 0.0 2023 Feb.
+ 0.3 +2.2 +1.9 +0.3 – 1.9 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 1.8 – 0.4 +0.0 + 0.4 ± 0.0 Mar.
– 2.7 –0.1 +1.8 –1.9 – 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 2.7 – 0.1 –0.1 + 0.2 ± 0.0 Apr.
– 0.6 –0.3 –0.4 +0.2 – 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.4 – 0.0 +0.4 – 1.2 ± 0.0 May
+ 2.3 +1.0 +1.8 –0.9 + 1.3 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 1.6 – 1.6 –0.1 + 2.5 ± 0.0 June
+ 2.7 +0.6 +1.6 –1.1 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 2.0 – 0.0 +0.0 – 2.1 ± 0.0 July
– 2.9 –1.9 –1.0 –0.8 – 1.1 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.9 – 0.2 +0.1 + 1.8 ± 0.0 Aug.
+ 1.9 +3.2 +3.1 +0.1 – 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 1.4 + 1.0 –0.1 – 0.7 ± 0.0 Sep.
+ 1.2 –1.0 –0.8 –0.2 + 2.2 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 2.3 + 0.2 +0.3 – 0.2 ± 0.0 Oct.
domicile are regarded as a single branch.  2 Treasury bills, Treasury discount paper and
other money market paper, debt securities.  3 Including own debt securities.  4 Excluding
subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities.  5 Issues of negotiable andnon-negotiable debt securities and money market paper.  6 Including subordinated
liabilities.  7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
42•
V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2Required reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4 Current accounts  5Excess reserves
(without deposit
facility)  6 Deficiencies  7
2016 11,918.5 119.2 118.8 919.0 800.3 0.0
2017 12,415.8 124.2 123.8 1,275.2 1,151.4 0.0
2018 12,775.2 127.8 127.4 1,332.1 1,204.8 0.0
2019 13,485.4 134.9 134.5 1,623.7 1,489.3 0.0
2020 14,590.4 145.9 145.5 3,029.4 2,883.9 0.0
2021 15,576.6 155.8 155.4 3,812.3 3,656.9 0.1
2022 16,843.0 168.4 168.0 195.6 28.1 0.0
2023 Oct. . . . . . .
p Nov. 16,421.9 164.2 163.9 172.0 ... ...
p Dec. ... ... ... ... ... ...
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2German share of
euro area reserve base
as a percentageRequired reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4Current accounts  5Excess reserves
(without deposit
facility)  6 Deficiencies  7
2016 3,371,095 28.3 33,711 33,546 301,989 268,443 0
2017 3,456,192 27.8 34,562 34,404 424,547 390,143 2
2018 3,563,306 27.9 35,633 35,479 453,686 418,206 1
2019 3,728,027 27.6 37,280 37,131 486,477 449,346 0
2020 4,020,792 27.6 40,208 40,062 878,013 837,951 1
2021 4,260,398 27.4 42,604 42,464 1,048,819 1,006,355 0
2022 4,664,630 27.7 46,646 46,512 54,848 8,337 5
2023 Oct. . . . . . . .
p Nov. 4,471,738 27.2 44,717 44,587 47,283 2,695 2
p Dec. 4,483,853 ... 44,839 44,709 ... ... ...
a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Big banksRegional banks
and other
commercial banksBranches of
foreign banksLandesbanken and
savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banksBanks with special,
development and
other central
support tasks
2016 6,384 5,390 2,812 10,905 5,960 236 1,859
2017 6,366 5,678 3,110 11,163 6,256 132 1,699
2018 7,384 4,910 3,094 11,715 6,624 95 1,658
2019 7,684 5,494 2,765 12,273 7,028 109 1,778
2020 8,151 6,371 3,019 12,912 7,547 111 2,028
2021 9,113 6,713 2,943 13,682 8,028 109 1,876
2022 9,814 7,396 3,216 14,465 8,295 117 2,471
2023 Oct. . . . . . . .
Nov. 9,268 7,182 3,194 14,061 8,152 145 2,248
Dec. 9,282 7,417 3,170 14,061 8,178 148 2,118
b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Liabilities (excluding savings
deposits, deposits with build-
ing and loan associations
and repos) to non-MFIs with
agreed maturities of up to 2
yearsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed maturities
of up to 2 years to MFIs that are
resident in euro area countries but
not subject to minimum reserve
requirementsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed
maturities of up to 2 years to
banks in non-euro area countriesSavings deposits with agreed
periods of notice of up
to 2 yearsLiabilities arising from bearer debt
securities issued with agreed matu-
rities of up to 2 years and bearer
money market paper after deduction
of a standard amount for bearer debt
certificates or deduction of such
paper held by the reporting
institution
2016 2,203,100 1,595 447,524 585,099 133,776
2017 2,338,161 628 415,084 581,416 120,894
2018 2,458,423 1,162 414,463 576,627 112,621
2019 2,627,478 1,272 410,338 577,760 111,183
2020 2,923,462 1,607 436,696 560,770 105,880
2021 3,079,722 9,030 508,139 561,608 101,907
2022 3,352,177 12,609 566,227 543,694 116,094
2023 Oct. . . . . .
Nov. 3,419,899 2,345 423,373 462,063 130,302
Dec. 3,447,513 968 420,839 455,493 125,531
1 The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main refinancing
operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for
which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled.  2 Article 5 of the
Regulation (EU) 2021/378 of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum
reserve requirements (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies,
pursuant to Article 6(1)(a)).  3 Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was 2%between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it has stood at
1%. 4 Article 6(2) of the Regulation (EU) 2021/378 of the European Central Bank on the
application of minimum reserve requirements.  5 Average credit balances of credit
institutions at national central banks.  6 Average credit balances less required reserves
after deduction of the lump-sum allowance.  7 Required reserves after deduction of the
lump-sum allowance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
43•
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest
% per annum
ECB interest rates Basic rates of interest
Main refinancing
operationsMain refinancing
operations
Applicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1Applicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1
2012 July 11 0.00 0.75 – 1.50 2022 July 27 0.00 0.50 – 0.75 2007 Jan. 1 2.70 2013 Jan. 1 – 0.13
Sep. 14 0.75 1.25 – 1.50 July 1 3.19 July 1 – 0.38
2013 May 8 0.00 0.50 – 1.00 Nov. 2 1.50 2.00 – 2.25
Nov. 13 0.00 0.25 – 0.75 Dec. 21 2.00 2.50 – 2.75 2008 Jan. 1 3.32 2014 Jan. 1 – 0.63
July 1 3.19 July 1 – 0.73
2014 June 11 – 0.10 0.15 – 2023 Feb. 8 2.50 3.00 – 3.25
Sep. 10 – 0.20 0.05 – 2.00 Mar. 22 3.00 3.50 – 3.75 2009 Jan. 1 1.62 2015 Jan. 1 – 0.83
2.25 May 10 3.25 3.75 – 4.00 July 1 0.12
2015 Dec. 9 – 0.30 0.05 – 2.00 June 21 3.50 4.00 – 4.25 2016 July 1 – 0.88
Aug. 2 3.75 4.25 – 4.50 2011 July 1 0.37
2016 Mar. 16 – 0.40 0.00 – 0.25 Sep. 20 4.00 4.50 – 4.75 2023 Jan. 1 1.62
2012 Jan. 1 0.12 July 1 3.12
2019 Sep. 18 – 0.50 0.00 – 0.25
2024 Jan. 1 3.62
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid
amountAllotment
amount Fixed rateMinimum
bid rate Marginal rate  1Weighted
average rate
Date of
Settlement € million % per annumRunning for
… days
Main refinancing operations
Dec. 20 8 391 8 391 4.50 – – – 7
Dec. 27 14 085 14 085 4.50 – – – 7
Jan. 3 7 375 7 375 4.50 – – – 7
Jan. 10 5 960 5 960 4.50 – – – 7
Jan. 17 5 864 5 864 4.50 – – – 7
Long-term refinancing operations
Oct. 26 540 540 2      … – – − 97
Nov. 30 2 333 2 333 2      … – – − 90
Dec. 21 1 060 1 060 2      … – – − 97
* Source: ECB.  1 Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or
collected.  2 Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at: a) the
average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of thisoperation including a spread or b) the average deposit facility rate over the life of this
operation.
3. Money market rates, by month
% per annum
EURIBOR ®  2
Monthly
average €STR  1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Twelve-month funds
2023 May 3.080 3.090 3.150 3.370 3.680 3.860
June 3.238 3.250 3.340 3.540 3.830 4.010
July 3.402 3.400 3.470 3.670 3.940 4.150
Aug. 3.642 3.630 3.630 3.780 3.940 4.070
Sep. 3.747 3.750 3.760 3.880 4.030 4.150
Oct. 3.901 3.880 3.860 3.970 4.120 4.160
Nov. 3.902 3.874 3.841 3.972 4.065 4.022
Dec. 3.902 3.858 3.858 3.935 3.927 3.679
* Publication does not establish an entitlement to provision of the rates. The Deutsche
Bundesbank reserves the right to cease publishing the information on its website in
future. All data are supplied without liability. No explicit or implicit assurances or
guarantees are made as to the up-to-dateness, accuracy, timeliness, completeness,
marketability or suitability of the data as interest rates or reference interest rates.
Neither the European Money Markets Institute (EMMI), nor Euribor EBF, nor Euribor
ACI, nor the Euribor Panel Banks, nor the Euribor Steering Committee, nor the
European Central Bank, nor Reuters, nor the Deutsche Bundesbank can be held liable
for any irregularity or inaccuracy, incompleteness or late provision of the money market
rates. With regard to the €STR please consider the European Central Bank's disclaimer,
which also applies for the Deutsche Bundesbank's publication:
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/financial_markets_and_interest_rates/euro_short-
term_rate/html/index.en.html
1 Euro Short-Term Rate: On the basis of individual euro-denominated transactions
conducted and settled on the previous business day, the European Central Bankpublishes the €STR since 2 October 2019. Transactions are reported by euro area banks
subject to reporting obligations in compliance with Money Market Statistical Reporting
Regulation. Monthly averages are calculations by Deutsche Bundesbank.  2 Monthly
averages are own calculations by Deutsche Bundesbank based on Euribor® daily rates
calculated by the European Money Markets Institute (EMMI). These are unweighted
averages. Information on the methodology of Euribor® daily rates are available below.
Please be aware that commercial use of these data is only possible with a licence
agreement with the European Money Markets Institute (EMMI). Information on its
terms of use are available under the link below. Values calculated from November 2023
onwards with three decimal places. Previous values calculated with two decimal places.
For technical reasons, these values are also displayed with three decimal places and the
third decimal place is filled with a 0. Up to and including October 2023 all values
calculated and published with two decimal places
https://www.emmi-benchmarks.eu/terms-of-use
https://www.emmi-benchmarks.eu/benchmarks/euribor/

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
44•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
a) Outstanding amounts o
Households' deposits Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2022 Nov. 0.94 69,368 0.85 218,426 1.13 121,576 1.00 23,542
Dec. 1.16 84,147 0.86 220,466 1.39 123,678 1.02 22,605
2023 Jan. 1.37 103,036 0.87 221,773 1.67 131,363 1.05 23,299
Feb. 1.57 119,894 0.87 222,671 1.98 140,254 1.07 23,409
Mar. 1.77 140,046 0.88 223,661 2.29 148,756 1.09 22,527
Apr. 1.91 157,796 0.89 224,586 2.44 155,233 1.12 22,140
May 2.07 180,323 0.90 225,884 2.65 153,693 1.17 22,199
June 2.23 200,501 0.91 226,645 2.86 162,035 1.20 22,133
July 2.37 222,529 0.92 227,182 3.01 168,874 1.24 21,619
Aug. 2.52 246,001 0.94 228,521 3.15 180,132 1.27 21,610
Sep. 2.61 262,537 0.95 229,285 3.27 181,385 1.28 21,507
Oct. 2.76 288,227 0.97 230,966 3.39 197,527 1.32 21,449
Nov. 2.88 315,984 1.01 233,972 3.43 193,442 1.39 21,232
Housing loans to households  3 Loans to households for consumption and other purposes  4,5
with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2022 Nov. 3.35 3,604 2.21 27,320 1.73 1,533,123 7.51 47,012 3.60 75,908 3.46 333,366
Dec. 3.66 3,497 2.37 26,984 1.74 1,535,823 7.73 47,250 3.68 76,467 3.49 331,711
2023 Jan. 4.10 3,550 2.52 26,527 1.76 1,534,684 8.20 46,598 3.78 75,973 3.55 332,207
Feb. 4.32 3,429 2.64 26,317 1.77 1,536,492 8.44 47,291 3.84 75,755 3.59 332,184
Mar. 4.45 3,493 2.77 26,266 1.78 1,540,365 8.67 48,137 3.94 75,854 3.64 330,164
Apr. 4.72 3,490 2.94 26,102 1.79 1,542,767 8.86 47,023 4.05 75,742 3.72 330,568
May 4.93 3,423 3.03 25,960 1.81 1,544,206 9.12 47,513 4.14 75,472 3.77 330,677
June 5.10 3,298 3.13 25,865 1.82 1,546,102 9.25 48,284 4.24 76,260 3.83 329,576
July 5.34 3,413 3.26 25,712 1.83 1,548,159 9.45 47,192 4.35 76,468 3.90 330,500
Aug. 5.41 3,391 3.33 25,573 1.85 1,550,499 9.55 47,277 4.45 76,654 3.95 330,602
Sep. 5.49 3,233 3.38 25,315 1.86 1,553,618 9.72 47,706 4.54 76,662 3.99 329,641
Oct. 5.57 3,312 3.50 25,212 1.87 1,554,344 9.95 47,325 4.65 76,583 4.06 329,490
Nov. 5.70 3,294 3.58 24,792 1.89 1,556,410 9.99 46,653 4.74 76,914 4.09 328,945
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2022 Nov. 3.49 213,334 2.49 236,253 1.96 879,122
Dec. 3.70 192,635 2.83 240,161 2.01 872,949
2023 Jan. 4.04 199,612 3.07 241,498 2.05 876,315
Feb. 4.28 194,396 3.22 246,124 2.07 878,910
Mar. 4.66 193,205 3.45 245,152 2.13 876,723
Apr. 4.98 194,154 3.65 247,337 2.19 879,353
May 5.19 194,261 3.76 252,289 2.22 885,481
June 5.42 193,968 3.95 250,107 2.29 883,229
July 5.62 194,789 4.09 251,312 2.35 887,112
Aug. 5.72 188,564 4.17 251,445 2.37 889,482
Sep. 5.89 187,448 4.29 248,998 2.41 887,643
Oct. 6.05 186,407 4.42 251,931 2.45 889,648
Nov. 5.97 187,766 4.45 253,985 2.48 892,398
* The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate
statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the related volumes of
euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non-financial corporations
domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises individuals (including sole
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations
include all enterprises other than insurance corporations, banks and other financial
institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional.
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the
Bundesbank’s website (Statistics/Money and capital markets/Interest rates and
yields/Interest rates on deposits and loans).  o The statistics on outstanding amounts are
collected at the end of the month.  1 The effective interest rates are calculated either asannualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation
methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related
charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents,
guarantees and credit insurance.  2 Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics.
3 Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home
improvements; including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim
credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name
and for their own account.  4 Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for
the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services.  5 For the
purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as
business, debt consolidation, education, etc.  6 Including overdrafts (see also footnotes
12 to 14 on p. 47 ).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
45•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Households' deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice  8 of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2022 Nov. 0.02 1,858,811 1.34 17,255 1.99 1,783 1.70 1,958 0.13 514,161 0.33 22,556
Dec. 0.07 1,857,241 1.53 20,197 2.01 1,738 1.52 2,138 0.16 510,188 0.40 22,970
2023 Jan. 0.09 1,839,201 1.68 26,082 2.14 2,941 1.97 2,504 0.20 498,875 0.53 23,945
Feb. 0.12 1,828,243 1.95 25,533 2.24 2,346 2.09 1,853 0.26 490,990 0.67 25,179
Mar. 0.17 1,801,473 2.19 29,674 2.36 3,672 2.07 2,194 0.30 480,790 0.84 26,746
Apr. 0.22 1,807,037 2.33 28,088 2.47 3,409 2.35 2,055 0.35 470,731 0.96 28,261
May 0.30 1,792,902 2.58 35,359 2.67 4,281 2.39 2,371 0.39 460,587 1.13 30,499
June 0.34 1,782,329 2.78 34,870 2.91 4,260 2.53 1,999 0.43 450,713 1.28 33,163
July 0.41 1,773,505 2.94 38,938 2.98 3,412 2.59 2,044 0.50 440,519 1.48 36,162
Aug. 0.51 1,757,994 3.12 46,037 3.15 4,422 2.81 2,374 0.55 429,372 1.62 38,895
Sep. 0.55 1,748,975 3.22 40,232 3.30 3,611 2.92 1,787 0.59 420,872 1.76 41,824
Oct. 0.56 1,728,935 3.40 51,187 3.46 5,558 2.99 2,743 0.64 411,490 1.94 44,837
Nov. 0.59 1,726,395 3.46 57,743 3.40 6,243 3.18 4,292 0.67 400,980 2.09 48,268
Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2022 Nov. 0.10 612,760 1.43 90,346 2.66 631 1.94 189
Dec. 0.11 601,728 1.66 65,813 2.94 734 2.42 252
2023 Jan. 0.19 595,205 1.96 89,287 2.92 671 2.41 89
Feb. 0.28 580,954 2.31 100,034 3.09 539 2.17 238
Mar. 0.44 568,777 2.58 89,971 2.95 723 2.62 292
Apr. 0.48 558,564 2.82 79,535 3.14 655 2.83 210
May 0.55 558,743 3.01 81,462 2.86 625 2.64 225
June 0.63 548,727 3.20 88,967 3.48 703 2.90 206
July 0.72 551,199 3.34 79,832 3.53 614 3.26 252
Aug. 0.81 548,242 3.50 89,027 3.46 570 2.93 210
Sep. 0.92 548,230 3.64 95,610 3.63 807 2.96 287
Oct. 0.97 551,400 3.74 95,412 3.78 752 2.97 266
Nov. 1.02 556,283 3.73 99,933 3.71 820 3.30 418
Loans to households
Loans for consumption  4 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2022 Nov. 6.81 6.87 7,913 7.92 1,330 7.51 385 5.37 2,868 7.74 4,659
Dec. 6.62 6.71 7,270 7.69 1,091 7.64 465 5.26 3,083 7.79 3,722
2023 Jan. 7.49 7.54 8,159 8.43 1,607 7.95 406 6.01 2,728 8.34 5,025
Feb. 7.56 7.52 7,505 8.42 1,364 8.96 307 6.13 2,664 8.24 4,534
Mar. 7.74 7.70 8,778 8.62 1,592 8.71 322 6.39 3,150 8.42 5,306
Apr. 8.10 7.99 7,348 8.87 1,351 9.77 278 6.69 2,551 8.62 4,519
May 8.13 8.07 8,269 9.00 1,505 9.98 296 6.79 2,819 8.66 5,154
June 8.05 7.99 9,277 9.15 1,568 10.32 316 6.62 3,493 8.72 5,468
July 8.40 8.35 8,628 9.32 1,609 10.92 295 7.04 2,974 8.94 5,359
Aug. 8.46 8.43 8,818 9.46 1,689 10.65 288 7.13 3,011 9.02 5,518
Sep. 8.57 8.47 8,036 9.53 1,530 10.21 274 7.18 2,798 9.11 4,964
Oct. 8.66 8.55 8,347 9.62 1,655 9.43 288 7.21 2,893 9.24 5,166
Nov. 8.72 8.55 8,130 9.77 1,572 8.45 329 7.29 2,863 9.29 4,938
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnote x see p. 47●. + For deposits with
an agreed maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card
debt: new business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial
corporations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted
average rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. For
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts,
credit card debt: new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for
the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending business atthe end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average rates of
interest.  7 Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form the
underlying total using a grossing-up procedure.  8 Including non-financial corporations’
deposits; including fidelity and growth premiums.  9 Excluding overdrafts.  10 Annual
percentage rate of charge, which contains other related charges which may occur for
enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit
insurance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
46•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd)
Loans to households for other purposes  5 with an initial rate fixation of
Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Loans to households 
2022 Nov. 3.78 3,938 3.28 947 3.52 1,808 4.18 746 3.90 1,384
Dec. 3.90 5,403 3.43 1,210 3.86 3,026 4.24 762 3.80 1,615
2023 Jan. 4.10 3,906 3.74 1,286 3.98 2,082 4.55 621 4.07 1,203
Feb. 4.35 3,065 4.03 814 4.36 1,467 4.83 508 4.10 1,090
Mar. 4.56 4,852 4.29 1,293 4.66 2,388 4.87 761 4.28 1,703
Apr. 4.64 3,803 4.45 1,210 4.76 1,767 4.92 744 4.31 1,292
May 4.83 3,400 4.62 997 5.08 1,511 5.10 710 4.37 1,179
June 4.93 4,341 4.68 1,388 5.26 1,974 5.19 892 4.33 1,475
July 4.96 4,086 4.54 1,161 5.39 1,766 5.12 933 4.31 1,387
Aug. 5.16 3,430 5.02 882 5.72 1,290 5.24 910 4.50 1,230
Sep. 5.24 3,526 5.08 814 5.76 1,489 5.29 848 4.54 1,189
Oct. 5.45 3,348 5.37 1,068 5.95 1,483 5.57 724 4.73 1,141
Nov. 5.43 3,152 5.13 765 5.90 1,345 5.53 764 4.76 1,043
    of which: Loans to sole proprietors
2022 Nov. 3.91 2,684 . . 3.69 1,175 4.32 563 3.94 946
Dec. 4.11 3,777 . . 4.10 2,187 4.51 554 3.89 1,036
2023 Jan. 4.18 2,830 . . 4.06 1,489 4.75 465 4.07 876
Feb. 4.44 2,297 . . 4.47 1,105 4.94 411 4.15 781
Mar. 4.69 3,544 . . 4.75 1,822 5.13 567 4.37 1,155
Apr. 4.77 2,657 . . 4.90 1,207 5.01 575 4.44 875
May 4.98 2,473 . . 5.28 1,072 5.24 547 4.44 854
June 5.04 3,178 . . 5.36 1,535 5.36 633 4.35 1,010
July 5.09 2,963 . . 5.48 1,337 5.48 592 4.37 1,034
Aug. 5.30 2,381 . . 5.91 934 5.55 551 4.53 896
Sep. 5.32 2,459 . . 5.80 1,094 5.57 523 4.55 842
Oct. 5.52 2,472 . . 6.03 1,094 5.67 547 4.74 831
Nov. 5.52 2,249 . . 6.06 900 5.60 587 4.82 762
Loans to households (cont'd)
Housing loans  3 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 yearsover 5 year and
up to 10 years over 10 years
Erhebungs-
zeitraumAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2022 Nov. 3.67 3.60 13,557 3.32 2,689 3.40 2,330 3.75 1,209 3.51 4,846 3.75 5,172
Dec. 3.60 3.52 13,514 3.17 2,756 3.57 2,620 3.74 1,267 3.41 4,837 3.55 4,790
2023 Jan. 3.73 3.66 12,735 3.47 3,076 3.95 2,244 3.80 1,196 3.45 4,531 3.70 4,764
Feb. 3.85 3.79 12,055 3.73 2,724 4.16 2,097 3.99 1,207 3.60 4,229 3.74 4,522
Mar. 3.95 3.88 15,260 3.76 3,248 4.44 2,459 4.10 1,524 3.64 5,388 3.80 5,889
Apr. 3.98 3.93 12,999 4.06 2,870 4.63 2,109 4.23 1,276 3.70 4,471 3.77 5,144
May 3.99 3.94 13,657 3.92 2,945 4.82 2,148 4.27 1,359 3.66 5,038 3.76 5,112
June 4.12 4.06 13,983 4.28 2,565 5.05 2,301 4.38 1,450 3.73 4,986 3.84 5,246
July 4.08 4.02 14,335 4.03 2,845 5.20 1,949 4.37 1,469 3.71 5,352 3.82 5,564
Aug. 4.19 4.14 14,386 4.43 2,611 5.29 2,198 4.53 1,388 3.81 5,275 3.89 5,525
Sep. 4.17 4.12 12,286 4.32 2,017 5.40 1,523 4.48 1,171 3.89 4,534 3.85 5,058
Oct. 4.22 4.18 13,831 4.39 2,853 5.53 1,989 4.53 1,403 3.85 5,304 3.90 5,136
Nov. 4.27 4.22 13,473 4.56 2,236 5.62 1,723 4.61 1,588 3.92 4,936 3.92 5,225
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2022 Nov. . 3.47 6,083 . . 3.22 806 3.62 563 3.42 2,402 3.57 2,312
Dec. . 3.43 5,975 . . 3.46 923 3.64 554 3.36 2,213 3.42 2,285
2023 Jan. . 3.51 5,615 . . 3.85 813 3.66 584 3.38 2,136 3.47 2,082
Feb. . 3.64 5,134 . . 4.04 763 3.84 556 3.49 1,928 3.58 1,887
Mar. . 3.74 6,734 . . 4.30 841 4.05 752 3.56 2,520 3.65 2,621
Apr. . 3.79 5,967 . . 4.61 824 4.02 601 3.59 2,141 3.62 2,401
May . 3.82 5,821 . . 4.68 789 4.14 629 3.59 2,225 3.66 2,178
June . 3.85 6,185 . . 4.81 836 4.13 648 3.61 2,314 3.67 2,387
July . 3.88 6,592 . . 5.08 729 4.20 661 3.63 2,384 3.72 2,818
Aug. . 3.96 6,467 . . 5.10 767 4.29 637 3.73 2,399 3.75 2,664
Sep. . 3.93 5,704 . . 5.36 540 4.32 551 3.78 2,092 3.65 2,521
Oct. . 4.01 6,207 . . 5.44 769 4.38 587 3.73 2,335 3.76 2,516
Nov. . 4.02 6,174 . . 5.50 669 4.45 728 3.80 2,170 3.70 2,607
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
footnote 11, see p. 47●.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
47•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which: of which:
Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13Extended
credit card debtRevolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2022 Nov. 8.44 38,580 8.20 27,368 15.61 6,475 3.74 97,850 3.76 97,371
Dec. 8.70 38,597 8.53 27,493 15.55 6,515 3.99 94,611 4.01 94,205
2023 Jan. 9.16 38,116 8.95 27,199 16.34 6,480 4.31 98,205 4.32 97,791
Feb. 9.40 38,538 9.32 27,356 16.60 6,475 4.63 98,285 4.65 97,859
Mar. 9.56 39,280 9.54 28,281 16.58 6,390 5.08 98,123 5.11 97,659
Apr. 9.78 38,352 9.76 27,177 17.13 6,407 5.44 99,534 5.47 99,094
May 9.98 38,906 10.10 27,431 17.19 6,478 5.61 99,175 5.63 98,709
June 10.11 39,692 10.30 28,067 17.23 6,528 5.83 99,351 5.86 98,897
July 10.32 38,818 10.48 27,182 17.58 6,580 6.00 98,185 6.03 97,770
Aug. 10.39 39,026 10.60 27,146 17.79 6,611 6.11 94,939 6.14 94,514
Sep. 10.59 39,548 10.75 27,976 17.86 6,629 6.25 95,468 6.28 95,004
Oct. 10.82 39,186 11.02 27,570 18.09 6,656 6.42 94,418 6.45 93,913
Nov. 10.80 38,416 10.95 26,932 18.18 6,614 6.41 95,688 6.44 95,191
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which: Loans up to €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of Loans over €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of
TotalRenegotiated
loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 yearsfloating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2022 Nov. 3.14 76,430 3.14 20,220 3.53 10,542 4.71 1,587 3.80 1,046 2.94 51,493 3.51 3,923 3.33 7,839
Dec. 3.45 107,068 3.42 32,607 3.91 11,995 4.98 1,854 3.81 1,138 3.35 75,616 3.55 6,334 3.25 10,131
2023 Jan. 3.59 81,688 3.66 23,420 4.41 10,450 5.10 1,586 3.88 1,021 3.42 60,491 3.85 2,968 3.24 5,172
Feb. 3.88 85,530 3.83 19,830 4.84 10,275 5.58 1,480 4.06 863 3.70 64,785 4.07 2,789 3.66 5,338
Mar. 4.36 102,182 4.20 29,585 5.18 12,826 5.70 2,212 4.13 1,223 4.24 70,035 4.41 5,308 3.91 10,578
Apr. 4.45 73,584 4.46 23,051 5.24 9,722 5.84 1,572 4.32 999 4.36 51,380 4.18 3,476 3.77 6,435
May 4.65 79,772 4.62 21,546 5.37 11,322 6.13 1,607 4.22 1,060 4.59 55,568 4.00 3,590 4.00 6,625
June 4.88 100,910 4.89 33,256 5.58 12,583 6.39 1,760 4.31 1,219 4.85 72,375 4.70 4,371 3.95 8,602
July 5.06 85,629 4.88 28,176 6.39 10,764 6.54 1,838 4.35 1,167 4.91 61,061 5.32 3,989 3.94 6,810
Aug. 5.11 73,312 5.15 21,335 6.01 10,015 6.63 1,698 4.46 999 5.06 51,942 4.47 3,017 3.95 5,641
Sep. 5.16 83,317 5.30 25,702 6.04 10,804 6.76 1,689 4.35 959 5.09 60,497 5.03 3,077 4.10 6,291
Oct. 5.39 76,734 5.27 24,750 6.35 10,963 6.93 1,781 4.61 912 5.30 54,862 5.02 3,674 4.11 4,542
Nov. 5.17 79,530 5.30 22,412 6.27 10,430 6.87 1,838 4.50 937 5.07 56,619 4.57 3,721 4.07 5,985
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2022 Nov. 3.50 9,542 . . 3.45 462 3.93 93 3.49 269 3.56 6,290 3.81 739 3.12 1,689
Dec. 3.41 17,202 . . 3.72 588 4.08 126 3.41 291 3.41 10,703 4.20 1,417 3.08 4,077
2023 Jan. . . . . 4.00 553 3.72 123 . . 3.92 6,635 4.01 652 3.07 1,196
Feb. 3.93 8,371 . . 4.34 400 4.37 96 3.61 208 4.03 6,148 3.87 514 3.20 1,005
Mar. 4.15 14,364 . . 4.60 641 4.73 117 3.62 331 4.22 10,350 4.11 1,117 3.64 1,808
Apr. 4.48 10,295 . . 4.88 452 4.52 120 3.81 269 4.71 6,760 4.81 541 3.69 2,153
May . . . . 5.06 456 4.80 108 3.80 268 . . 4.37 876 3.77 1,623
June . . . . 5.14 573 4.75 99 3.87 340 . . 5.16 1,293 3.75 1,183
July 4.86 11,078 . . 5.44 489 4.91 126 3.98 325 4.87 6,823 5.86 1,544 3.94 1,771
Aug. 5.08 9,797 . . 5.58 425 5.01 122 3.85 279 5.45 6,747 4.32 890 3.79 1,334
Sep. . . . . 5.63 450 5.28 109 3.88 253 . . 5.19 1,187 3.76 1,487
Oct. 5.05 12,103 . . 5.66 508 5.14 140 3.95 213 5.21 8,840 5.38 1,005 3.73 1,397
Nov. 4.69 10,586 . . 5.73 353 4.83 107 3.88 250 4.90 7,211 4.51 1,045 3.74 1,620
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
11 For the purposes of the interest rate statistics, a loan is considered to be secured if
collateral (amongst others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at
least the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned.
12 Including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower
may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior
notice to the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as
funds are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no
obligation of regular repayment of funds.  13 Overdrafts are defined as debit balanceson current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are
within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank.  14 Including
convenience and extended credit card debt. Convenience credit is defined as the credit
granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period between payment transactions effected
with the card during one billing cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this
specific billing cycle become due.  15 The amount category refers to the single loan
transaction considered as new business.  x Dominated by the business of one or two
banks. Therefore, the value cannot be published due to confidentiality.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
48•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets
€ billion
End of
year/quarter TotalCurrency
and
deposits  1Debt
securities Loans  2Shares and
other equityInvestment
fund
shares/unitsFinancial
derivativesTechnical
reserves  3Non-financial
assetsRemaining
assets
Insurance corporations 
2021 Q1 2,592.3 292.4 470.7 361.7 437.4 858.1 3.9 71.9 38.9 57.2
Q2 2,609.9 280.5 470.3 361.2 449.2 879.6 3.4 72.5 38.9 54.2
Q3 2,653.1 271.7 474.2 358.2 463.4 899.8 3.3 87.8 38.3 56.3
Q4 2,667.2 261.3 468.6 355.1 472.4 921.6 3.2 85.0 40.8 59.3
2022 Q1 2,547.3 243.7 440.2 333.2 468.7 870.5 2.7 87.5 41.0 59.8
Q2 2,369.7 215.6 390.3 305.5 462.5 803.5 3.0 85.5 41.3 62.5
Q3 2,296.2 202.0 369.9 289.1 461.2 776.7 4.0 84.2 41.4 67.6
Q4 2,274.7 189.5 373.7 279.7 465.8 772.2 3.4 79.5 38.7 72.2
2023 Q1 2,326.9 201.7 380.8 280.2 472.3 790.3 3.6 85.2 38.5 74.4
Q2 2,330.1 194.7 383.3 280.0 474.3 799.0 3.6 84.1 38.1 73.0
Q3 2,304.1 185.9 376.1 272.3 480.8 783.5 3.7 88.9 38.2 74.7
    Life insurance
2021 Q1 1,372.8 170.4 234.3 219.6 74.3 623.1 2.1 14.2 21.5 13.2
Q2 1,384.9 164.4 234.1 219.4 78.0 637.6 2.0 14.1 21.5 13.8
Q3 1,400.1 159.2 233.8 214.8 87.7 654.6 1.9 13.4 20.8 13.8
Q4 1,411.1 152.4 231.9 211.8 93.4 669.1 1.7 14.6 21.9 14.3
2022 Q1 1,317.7 136.8 211.5 193.1 99.7 626.1 0.9 13.9 22.0 13.8
Q2 1,202.1 120.5 180.3 173.1 104.2 569.4 0.9 13.6 22.1 17.9
Q3 1,149.6 110.2 166.6 162.1 107.0 546.4 1.1 12.3 22.3 21.7
Q4 1,130.1 103.6 170.5 155.6 111.4 540.0 1.1 11.5 19.5 16.8
2023 Q1 1,147.9 105.1 170.4 155.6 113.3 553.4 1.0 12.1 19.4 17.5
Q2 1,153.6 102.8 171.7 154.9 114.3 559.4 1.0 12.1 19.3 18.1
Q3 1,120.8 97.6 162.9 149.1 115.7 545.2 1.5 11.8 19.1 18.0
    Non-life insurance
2021 Q1 721.2 108.1 140.2 83.6 88.7 218.9 0.4 40.0 12.8 28.6
Q2 724.6 103.3 141.0 83.4 90.5 225.7 0.4 40.3 12.7 27.2
Q3 733.1 98.7 141.0 83.8 93.7 228.4 0.4 46.4 12.8 27.7
Q4 738.4 94.6 140.1 84.7 97.5 234.3 0.3 44.6 14.0 28.4
2022 Q1 722.4 91.4 133.4 80.8 98.5 227.7 0.2 45.7 13.9 30.7
Q2 681.6 81.9 122.0 74.8 98.6 216.5 0.1 44.0 14.1 29.5
Q3 661.1 76.2 116.0 70.3 99.2 212.2 0.1 43.1 14.1 29.7
Q4 659.0 72.7 115.2 69.1 99.8 215.5 0.2 42.4 14.2 30.1
2023 Q1 687.2 81.3 121.2 69.5 102.7 219.8 0.1 45.2 14.2 33.2
Q2 687.1 77.2 123.9 70.3 103.1 222.4 0.1 45.1 14.1 30.9
Q3 679.3 73.5 122.3 68.6 104.5 221.1 0.1 45.5 14.3 29.3
    Reinsurance 4
2021 Q1 498.4 13.9 96.3 58.5 274.4 16.2 1.4 17.7 4.7 15.3
Q2 500.4 12.8 95.2 58.4 280.7 16.4 1.0 18.1 4.6 13.2
Q3 519.9 13.9 99.3 59.6 282.0 16.7 1.0 28.0 4.7 14.8
Q4 517.7 14.3 96.6 58.6 281.4 18.2 1.1 25.9 4.9 16.7
2022 Q1 507.1 15.5 95.3 59.3 270.4 16.7 1.6 27.9 5.0 15.3
Q2 486.0 13.2 88.0 57.5 259.6 17.6 1.9 27.9 5.1 15.1
Q3 485.5 15.6 87.3 56.7 255.1 18.1 2.7 28.8 5.1 16.2
Q4 485.6 13.2 88.0 55.0 254.6 16.7 2.1 25.7 5.0 25.3
2023 Q1 491.8 15.3 89.2 55.0 256.3 17.1 2.4 27.8 4.8 23.7
Q2 489.5 14.7 87.6 54.8 256.9 17.2 2.5 26.9 4.8 24.0
Q3 503.9 14.8 90.9 54.6 260.7 17.1 2.1 31.6 4.8 27.3
Pension funds 5
2021 Q1 664.3 86.1 58.7 48.6 10.8 427.9 0.2 12.1 17.6 2.3
Q2 683.2 85.0 60.2 49.3 11.2 445.2 0.1 12.1 17.8 2.3
Q3 689.8 82.9 60.4 48.9 11.8 453.6 0.1 12.2 17.8 2.2
Q4 709.9 82.1 60.0 48.7 11.2 473.5 0.1 12.4 18.5 3.3
2022 Q1 689.0 75.7 56.6 46.2 11.9 465.3 0.0 12.5 18.5 2.2
Q2 664.2 70.2 52.8 43.2 12.3 452.2 0.0 12.4 18.6 2.5
Q3 654.6 67.6 51.8 42.0 12.7 446.0 0.0 13.2 18.7 2.6
Q4 660.9 67.3 53.0 41.8 12.8 450.2 0.0 13.6 18.8 3.4
2023 Q1 666.3 65.8 56.6 42.0 13.6 453.5 0.0 13.5 18.8 2.6
Q2 674.7 67.9 59.1 42.6 13.7 456.5 0.0 13.5 18.9 2.5
Q3 669.9 67.3 59.8 42.0 14.0 451.5 0.1 13.4 19.1 2.6
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections.  1 Accounts receivable to monetary financial institutions, including
registered bonds, borrower's note loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including
deposits retained on assumed reinsurance as well as registered bonds, borrower's note
loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  3 Including reinsurance recoverables and claims ofpension funds on pension managers.  4 Not including the reinsurance business
conducted by primary insurers, which is included there.  5 The term "pension funds"
refers to the institutional sector "pension funds" of the European System of Accounts.
Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational pension
schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
49•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
2. Liabilities
€ billion
Technical reserves
End of
year/quarter TotalDebt
securities
issued Loans  1Shares and
other equity Total  2Life/
pension
entitlements  3 Non-lifeFinancial
derivativesRemaining
liabilities Net worth  6
Insurance corporations
2021 Q1 2,592.3 34.8 81.4 551.7 1,778.6 1,541.3 237.3 2.5 143.4 –
Q2 2,609.9 33.0 81.3 558.7 1,793.5 1,556.3 237.1 2.2 141.1 –
Q3 2,653.1 35.4 82.8 567.0 1,817.7 1,569.1 248.7 2.5 147.6 –
Q4 2,667.2 36.0 81.9 579.3 1,820.7 1,578.3 242.3 2.5 146.8 –
2022 Q1 2,547.3 34.4 82.1 563.1 1,725.9 1,472.6 253.3 4.0 137.7 –
Q2 2,369.7 33.6 78.7 541.6 1,574.4 1,326.8 247.5 6.0 135.3 –
Q3 2,296.2 33.8 73.6 537.4 1,506.0 1,262.3 243.7 7.4 138.0 –
Q4 2,274.7 32.3 70.1 543.7 1,486.5 1,248.7 237.8 5.6 136.5 –
2023 Q1 2,326.9 33.1 71.2 544.7 1,539.1 1,277.1 261.9 4.4 134.4 –
Q2 2,330.1 33.2 68.4 546.7 1,543.8 1,283.7 260.1 4.5 133.6 –
Q3 2,304.1 35.3 76.8 548.7 1,504.5 1,244.3 260.2 4.8 134.0 –
    Life insurance
2021 Q1 1,372.8 3.3 19.9 143.1 1,154.3 1,154.3 – 1.0 51.2 –
Q2 1,384.9 3.3 20.4 144.2 1,164.9 1,164.9 – 1.0 51.1 –
Q3 1,400.1 3.3 19.3 148.1 1,176.4 1,176.4 – 1.1 51.9 –
Q4 1,411.1 3.3 20.7 148.2 1,185.5 1,185.5 – 0.9 52.5 –
2022 Q1 1,317.7 3.2 19.9 142.9 1,101.6 1,101.6 – 1.4 48.8 –
Q2 1,202.1 3.1 19.0 141.4 984.5 984.5 – 2.7 51.3 –
Q3 1,149.6 3.0 17.0 138.0 936.9 936.9 – 3.1 51.8 –
Q4 1,130.1 2.7 16.6 136.0 924.9 924.9 – 2.3 47.7 –
2023 Q1 1,147.9 2.8 17.8 133.0 945.8 945.8 – 1.9 46.6 –
Q2 1,153.6 2.7 17.5 133.8 950.9 950.9 – 1.8 46.9 –
Q3 1,120.8 2.7 16.8 134.1 917.2 917.2 – 2.5 47.6 –
    Non-life insurance
2021 Q1 721.2 1.2 10.6 162.7 491.5 362.6 128.9 0.1 55.1 –
Q2 724.6 1.2 10.5 166.2 493.4 366.2 127.1 0.1 53.1 –
Q3 733.1 1.2 10.5 168.9 498.7 367.8 130.9 0.2 53.7 –
Q4 738.4 1.4 10.7 175.8 492.6 367.6 125.0 0.2 57.8 –
2022 Q1 722.4 1.3 11.7 173.1 483.0 347.1 135.9 0.3 53.0 –
Q2 681.6 1.2 11.1 167.6 451.9 322.7 129.2 0.5 49.2 –
Q3 661.1 1.2 10.5 167.9 430.4 307.4 123.0 0.5 50.5 –
Q4 659.0 1.2 10.4 170.2 425.1 306.7 118.4 0.4 51.7 –
2023 Q1 687.2 1.2 10.7 173.0 451.0 314.4 136.7 0.4 51.0 –
Q2 687.1 1.2 10.6 174.6 451.2 317.0 134.2 0.3 49.1 –
Q3 679.3 1.7 10.8 173.7 444.1 312.6 131.4 0.4 48.7 –
    Reinsurance 4
2021 Q1 498.4 30.2 50.9 245.8 132.8 24.4 108.4 1.4 37.2 –
Q2 500.4 28.5 50.4 248.3 135.2 25.2 110.0 1.1 36.9 –
Q3 519.9 30.9 53.0 250.1 142.7 24.9 117.8 1.3 42.0 –
Q4 517.7 31.4 50.5 255.3 142.6 25.3 117.3 1.4 36.5 –
2022 Q1 507.1 30.0 50.4 247.2 141.3 23.9 117.4 2.3 35.9 –
Q2 486.0 29.3 48.6 232.6 138.0 19.6 118.4 2.8 34.7 –
Q3 485.5 29.7 46.2 231.5 138.7 18.0 120.7 3.8 35.7 –
Q4 485.6 28.4 43.1 237.5 136.5 17.1 119.4 2.9 37.1 –
2023 Q1 491.8 29.2 42.8 238.7 142.2 17.0 125.3 2.1 36.8 –
Q2 489.5 29.3 40.2 238.3 141.7 15.8 125.9 2.4 37.6 –
Q3 503.9 31.0 49.2 241.0 143.3 14.5 128.7 1.9 37.7 –
Pension funds 5
2021 Q1 664.3 – 1.7 29.1 530.3 529.2 – 0.3 9.0 94.0
Q2 683.2 – 1.8 31.3 536.7 535.0 – 0.2 9.2 104.0
Q3 689.8 – 1.9 31.9 539.8 537.6 – 0.2 9.3 106.8
Q4 709.9 – 1.9 32.0 560.2 557.3 – 0.1 8.9 106.8
2022 Q1 689.0 – 2.0 26.8 559.0 556.8 – 0.1 11.2 89.9
Q2 664.2 – 1.8 23.4 559.7 558.1 – 0.1 11.6 67.7
Q3 654.6 – 1.9 21.2 561.1 560.2 – 0.1 13.0 57.2
Q4 660.9 – 1.8 24.3 580.8 580.5 – 0.1 11.5 42.5
2023 Q1 666.3 – 1.8 24.8 580.2 579.9 – 0.1 11.5 47.9
Q2 674.7 – 1.8 24.7 585.6 585.3 – 0.1 11.6 50.9
Q3 669.9 – 1.8 24.8 586.6 586.3 – 0.1 11.7 45.0
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections.  1 Including deposits retained on ceded business as well as registered
bonds, borrower's note loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including claims of pension
funds on pension managers and entitlements to non-pension benefits.  3 Technical
reserves "life" taking account of transitional measures. Health insurance is also includedin the "non-life insurance" sector.  4 Not including the reinsurance business conducted
by primary insurers, which is included there.  5 Valuation at book values. The term "pen-
sion funds" refers to the institutional sector "pension funds" of the European System of
Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational
pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included.  6 Own
funds correspond to the sum of "Net worth" and "Shares and other equity".

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
50•
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases TotalBank
debt
securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt
secur-
itiesForeign
debt
secur-
ities  3 Total  4Credit in-
stitutions
including
building
and loan
associations  5Deutsche
BundesbankOther
sectors  6Non-
residents  7
2011 33,649 13,575 –46,796 850 59,521 20,075 – 23,876 – 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,525
2012 51,813 –21,419 –98,820 – 8,701 86,103 73,231 – 3,767 – 42,017 – 3,573 41,823 55,581
2013 – 15,971 –101,616 –117,187 153 15,415 85,645 16,409 – 25,778 – 12,708 54,895 – 32,379
2014 58,735 –31,962 –47,404 – 1,330 16,776 90,697 44,384 – 12,124 – 11,951 68,459 14,351
2015 15,219 –36,010 –65,778 26,762 3,006 51,229 99,225 – 66,330 121,164 44,391 – 84,006
2016 68,998 27,429 19,177 18,265 –10,012 41,569 161,776 – 58,012 187,500 32,288 – 92,778
2017 51,034 11,563 1,096 7,112 3,356 39,471 134,192 – 71,454 161,012 44,634 – 83,158
2018 78,657 16,630 33,251 12,433 –29,055 62,027 107,155 – 24,417 67,328 64,244 – 28,499
2019 139,611 68,536 29,254 32,505 6,778 71,075 60,195 8,059 2,408 49,728 79,416
2020 451,409 374,034 14,462 88,703 270,870 77,374 285,318 18,955 226,887 39,476 166,091
2021 233,453 221,648 31,941 19,754 169,953 11,805 255,702 – 41,852 245,198 52,356 – 22,249
2022 155,940 156,190 59,322 35,221 61,648 – 219 155,609 2,915 49,774 102,920 331
2022 Dec. – 27,425 –31,394 –15,450 – 6,091 – 9,853 4,001 11,231 – 18,577 – 6,015 35,823 – 38,656
2023 Jan. 58,333 26,856 19,250 4,335 3,270 31,477 41,346 10,522 7,783 23,041 16,987
Feb. 24,581 11,680 5,466 – 1,673 7,886 12,901 25,280 13,504 – 4,961 16,736 – 699
Mar. 59,563 39,989 22,802 – 1,704 18,892 19,573 18,732 8,063 – 1,710 12,379 40,831
Apr. 8,074 – 4,404 – 1,130 – 3,176 – 97 12,477 12,253 – 747 – 13,293 26,292 – 4,179
May 49,437 34,077 28,468 3,010 2,599 15,359 12,041 1,206 – 1,655 12,490 37,395
June 44,247 22,910 – 6,490 5,312 24,089 21,337 38,527 16,773 – 8,853 30,607 5,720
July 25,644 27,889 981 – 79 26,987 – 2,245 – 629 – 8,514 324 7,561 26,273
Aug. 14,632 10,967 10,278 – 1,708 2,397 3,665 975 503 – 9,067 9,539 13,657
Sep. 16,575 16,310 – 7,089 6,461 16,938 265 – 5,420 – 8,020 – 11,311 13,912 21,995
Oct. – 20,618 –19,390 1,677 –10,955 –10,113 – 1,227 – 13,082 – 4,855 – 6,759 – 1,468 – 7,536
Nov. 27,804 18,119 8,954 – 3,594 12,759 9,686 21,662 10,760 – 5,186 16,088 6,142
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
purchasesDomestic
shares  8Foreign
shares  9 Total  10Credit insti-
tutions  5 Other sectors  11Non-
residents  12
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 – 14,971
2012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 656
2013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,337 11,991 5,346 2,851
2014 43,488 18,778 24,710 43,930 17,203 26,727 – 443
2015 56,979 7,668 49,311 46,721 – 5,421 52,142 10,258
2016 39,133 4,409 34,724 39,265 – 5,143 44,408 – 132
2017 52,932 15,570 37,362 51,270 7,031 44,239 1,662
2018 61,400 16,188 45,212 89,624 – 11,184 100,808 – 28,224
2019 54,830 9,076 45,754 43,070 – 1,119 44,189 11,759
2020 72,321 17,771 54,550 105,483 27 105,456 – 33,162
2021 115,746 49,066 66,681 102,927 10,869 92,058 12,819
2022 – 14,234 27,792 – 34,858 – 7,006 – 8,262 1,256 – 7,228
2022 Dec. 14,926 20,925 1,169 16,366 – 3,089 19,455 – 1,440
2023 Jan. 6,525 133 6,393 8,105 2,935 5,170 – 1,580
Feb. 4,863 2,371 2,492 6,098 4,494 1,604 – 1,235
Mar. – 1,346 1,696 – 3,042 650 1,985 – 1,335 – 1,996
Apr. 5,001 2,576 2,426 6,321 3,235 3,086 – 1,320
May – 708 592 – 1,299 377 – 2,497 2,874 – 1,084
June – 4,220 1,067 – 5,287 – 278 – 3,322 3,044 – 3,942
July 4,330 478 3,852 1,499 – 136 1,635 2,831
Aug. 440 1,474 – 1,034 3,509 – 893 4,402 – 3,069
Sep. – 4,807 687 – 5,495 – 3,719 1,962 – 5,681 – 1,088
Oct. 405 583 – 178 2,756 – 88 2,844 – 2,351
Nov. 1,360 301 1,059 318 543 – 225 1,041
1 Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers' portfolios of their own debt
securities.  2 Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction values.
4 Domestic and foreign debt securities.  5 Book values; statistically adjusted.  6 Residual;
also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.
Up to end-2008 including Deutsche Bundesbank.  7 Net purchases or net sales (-) of do-
mestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction values.  8 Excluding shares of publiclimited investment companies; at issue prices.  9 Net purchases or net sales (-) of foreign
shares (including direct investment) by residents; transaction values.  10 Domestic
and foreign shares.  11 Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign
securities by domestic mutual funds.  12 Net purchases or net sales (-) of domestic
shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The figures
for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
51•
VIII. Capital market
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities  1
Period Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by special-
purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt securities
Gross sales
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,258 574,530
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,892
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,675 400,701
3 2016 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,371 416,108
3 2017 1,047,822 619,199 30,339 8,933 438,463 141,466 66,290 362,332
2018 1,148,091 703,416 38,658 5,673 534,552 124,530 91,179 353,496
2019 1,285,541 783,977 38,984 9,587 607,900 127,504 94,367 407,197
6 2020 1,870,084 778,411 39,548 18,327 643,380 77,156 184,206 907,466
2021 1,658,004 795,271 41,866 17,293 648,996 87,116 139,775 722,958
2022 1,683,265 861,989 66,811 11,929 700,062 83,188 169,680 651,596
2023 Feb. 155,676 81,678 2,245 1,729 63,385 14,319 12,146 61,853
Mar. 190,528 99,938 1,252 60 89,786 8,840 11,158 79,431
Apr. 129,401 69,020 2,954 543 60,740 4,783 10,608 49,772
May 169,866 97,645 4,531 760 83,511 8,844 16,336 55,885
June 171,957 84,953 3,264 1,556 70,601 9,532 21,526 65,478
July 121,578 53,812 2,876 130 43,776 7,031 14,133 53,632
Aug. 142,211 82,749 3,085 1,013 71,729 6,922 10,064 49,397
Sep. 152,408 82,679 3,337 550 71,155 7,637 18,722 51,007
Oct. 132,402 83,350 1,697 2,557 71,328 7,769 10,151 38,901
Nov. 124,911 72,419 6,703 1,354 57,521 6,841 8,600 43,892
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years 4
2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888
2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765
2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
3 2016 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
3 2017 357,506 170,357 22,395 6,447 94,852 46,663 44,891 142,257
2018 375,906 173,995 30,934 4,460 100,539 38,061 69,150 132,760
2019 396,617 174,390 26,832 6,541 96,673 44,346 69,682 152,544
6 2020 658,521 165,097 28,500 7,427 90,839 38,330 77,439 415,985
2021 486,335 171,799 30,767 6,336 97,816 36,880 64,234 250,303
2022 485,287 164,864 41,052 7,139 91,143 25,530 56,491 263,932
2023 Feb. 51,443 14,927 820 310 10,272 3,525 3,065 33,450
Mar. 46,975 14,091 1,147 – 11,809 1,136 1,658 31,225
Apr. 33,709 10,326 2,769 500 6,367 690 2,683 20,700
May 49,315 14,703 2,898 – 9,458 2,347 4,527 30,085
June 53,960 12,885 2,664 498 9,123 600 10,475 30,600
July 34,145 10,133 430 2 7,964 1,736 2,298 21,715
Aug. 36,582 12,501 2,383 1,000 8,182 936 1,656 22,425
Sep. 40,995 8,847 2,250 – 5,127 1,470 8,741 23,407
Oct. 37,642 15,411 262 20 11,876 3,253 2,456 19,775
Nov. 34,787 13,146 6,203 600 4,135 2,208 2,291 19,350
Net sales 5
2012 – 85,298 – 100,198 – 4,177 – 41,660 – 3,259 – 51,099 – 6,401 21,298
2013 – 140,017 – 125,932 – 17,364 – 37,778 – 4,027 – 66,760 1,394 – 15,479
2014 – 34,020 – 56,899 – 6,313 – 23,856 – 862 – 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 – 65,147 – 77,273 9,271 – 9,754 – 2,758 – 74,028 25,300 – 13,174
3 2016 21,951 10,792 2,176 – 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 – 7,020
3 2017 2,669 5,954 6,389 – 4,697 18,788 – 14,525 6,828 – 10,114
2018 2,758 26,648 19,814 – 6,564 18,850 – 5,453 9,738 – 33,630
2019 59,719 28,750 13,098 – 3,728 26,263 – 6,885 30,449 519
6 2020 473,795 28,147 8,661 8,816 22,067 – 11,398 49,536 396,113
2021 210,231 52,578 17,821 7,471 22,973 4,314 35,531 122,123
2022 135,853 36,883 23,894 – 9,399 15,944 6,444 30,671 68,299
2023 Feb. 9,644 2,700 – 2,433 1,512 – 2,861 6,482 – 2,541 9,486
Mar. 46,022 19,989 – 2,032 – 1,517 18,332 5,206 – 1,614 27,647
Apr. – 26,464 – 2,812 1,244 – 5 – 3,074 – 976 – 3,714 – 19,938
May 40,674 26,575 1,932 254 20,562 3,826 2,259 11,840
June 25,517 – 7,752 – 509 11 – 9,065 1,811 7,559 25,710
July 30,229 700 – 53 110 – 502 1,146 – 734 30,263
Aug. 15,869 9,610 2,930 541 7,387 – 1,249 – 1,791 8,050
Sep. 12,991 – 6,384 28 – 809 – 4,706 – 897 8,074 11,300
Oct. – 7,927 – 1,596 – 2,527 – 1,529 – 895 3,356 – 2,197 – 4,135
Nov. 29,898 12,941 4,484 904 7,149 404 – 4,283 21,239
* For definitions, see the explanatory notes in Statistical Series - Securities Issues
Statistics on pages 43 f.  1 Excluding registered bank debt securities.  2 Including
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Sectoral reclassification of
debt securities.  4 Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue.  5 Gross sales lessredemptions.  6 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year
2020 have been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions
are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
52•
VIII. Capital market
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities
End of year
or month/
Maturity
in years Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by
special-purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)Public
debt securities
2012 3,285,422 1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
1 2016 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
1 2017 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 651,211 320,432 2 302,543 1,617,244
2018 3,091,303 1,194,160 161,088 51,439 670,062 1 311,572 1 2 313,527 1,583,616
2019 2 3,149,373 1,222,911 174,188 47,712 696,325 304,686 2 342,325 1,584,136
4 2020 2 3,545,200 2 1,174,817 183,980 55,959 687,710 2 247,169 2 379,342 1,991,040
2021 3,781,975 1,250,777 202,385 63,496 731,068 253,828 414,791 2,116,406
2022 3,930,390 1,302,028 225,854 54,199 761,047 260,928 441,234 2,187,127
2023 Jan. 3,948,426 1,313,581 232,105 52,647 763,260 265,568 444,529 2,190,316
Feb. 3,963,852 1,320,844 229,851 54,180 764,148 272,666 442,389 2,200,618
Mar. 4,005,403 1,335,447 227,451 52,890 777,696 277,410 440,399 2,229,557
Apr. 3,977,194 1,330,812 228,764 52,910 772,714 276,424 436,591 2,209,790
May 4,027,974 1,364,889 230,966 53,237 799,875 280,811 439,299 2,223,786
June 4,052,214 1,354,415 230,474 53,223 788,438 282,281 446,780 2,251,019
July 4,077,718 1,354,010 231,454 53,389 786,384 282,783 446,064 2,277,644
Aug. 4,095,643 1,365,614 234,566 53,961 795,808 281,279 444,711 2,285,319
Sep. 4,117,795 1,365,365 234,599 53,128 796,782 280,856 453,037 2,299,393
Oct. 4,110,219 1,362,975 231,537 52,084 794,730 284,623 450,654 2,296,591
Nov. 4,138,736 1,373,185 236,094 53,033 798,461 285,597 445,985 2,319,566
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity 3 Position at end-November 2023
bis unter 2   1 247 712   497 400   62 480   17 086   321 367   96 466   85 810   664 503 
 2 bis unter 4    800 484   333 494   74 677   15 786   169 967   73 063   80 892   386 098 
 4 bis unter 6    603 277   226 942   46 668   9 857   127 761   42 655   65 375   310 961 
6 bis unter 8    424 004   124 502   22 457   3 459   73 222   25 364   45 361   254 141 
 8 bis unter 10    292 330   85 146   14 415   2 771   51 531   16 430   29 604   177 580 
 10 bis unter 15    244 918   59 009   11 270   3 757   35 396   8 586   27 796   158 113 
 15 bis unter 20    114 067   15 569   3 358    231   9 863   2 117   15 013   83 485 
 20 und darüber    411 943   31 124    767    87   9 354   20 916   96 134   284 685 
* Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers' portfolios.  1 Sectoral
reclassification of debt securities.  2 Adjustments due to the change in the country of
residence of the issuers or debt securities.  3 Calculated from month under review until
final maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of theresidual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc.
4 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year 2020 have
been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions are not
specially marked.
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies' capital due to
PeriodShare capital =
circulation at
end of period
under reviewNet increase or
net decrease (-)
during period
under reviewcash payments
and ex-
change of
convertible
bonds  1issue of
bonus sharescontribution
of claims
and other
real assetsmerger
and
transfer
of assetschange of
legal formreduction
of capital 
and
liquidationMemo item:
Share circulation
at market values
(market capita-
lisation)
level at end
of period
under review  2
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 – 478 594 – 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 – 6,879 2,971 718 476 – 1,432 – 619 – 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 – 465 – 1,044 – 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 – 1,394 – 1,385 – 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 – 1,062 3,272 319 337 – 953 – 2,165 – 1,865 1,676,397
2017 178,828 2,471 3,894 776 533 – 457 – 661 – 1,615 1,933,733
2018 180,187 1,357 3,670 716 82 – 1,055 – 1,111 – 946 1,634,155
3 4 2019 183,461 1,673 2,411 2,419 542 – 858 – 65 – 2,775 1,950,224
4 2020 181,881 – 2,872 1,877 219 178 – 2,051 – 460 – 2,635 1,963,588
2021 186,580 4,152 9,561 672 35 – 326 – 212 – 5,578 2,301,942
2022 199,789 12,272 14,950 224 371 – 29 – 293 – 2,952 1,858,963
2023 Feb. 198,334 162 149 – 50 –– 0 – 37 2,064,749
Mar. 198,157 – 185 178 – – – –– 363 2,080,189
Apr. 198,426 267 431 – –– 0 – 6 – 157 2,086,578
May 198,497 71 153 – –– 0 –– 82 2,048,166
June 198,505 8 422 – –– 262 – 17 – 135 2,061,065
July 198,406 – 99 52 – –– 0 – 89 – 62 2,113,570
Aug. 198,654 210 452 – –– 1 – 24 – 217 2,038,560
Sep. 198,328 – 325 280 3 –– 201 – 10 – 397 1,966,858
Oct. 198,522 194 504 – –– 100 – 2 – 208 1,852,180
Nov. 198,456 – 67 62 0 0 0 0 – 129 2,002,568
* Excluding shares of public limited investment companies.  1 Including shares issued
out of company profits.  2 All marketplaces. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on
data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mit teilungen and Deutsche BörseAG. 3 Methodological changes since October 2019.  4 Changes due to statistical
adjustments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
53•
VIII. Capital market
5. Yields on German securities
Issue yields Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1
Public debt securities Public debt securities Bank debt securities
Listed Federal securities
Total Totalof which:
Listed Federal
debt securitiesBank debt 
securities Total Total TotalWith a residual
maturity of
 9 to
10 years  2 TotalWith a residual
maturity of more
than 9 years and
up to 10 yearsCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)
Period % per annum
2011 2.7 2.5 2.3 3.0 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3
2012 1.6 1.3 1.2 1.8 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7
2013 1.6 1.3 1.2 1.8 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4
2014 1.2 1.1 0.9 1.3 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0
2015 0.7 0.4 0.4 0.7 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4
2016 0.4 0.1 – 0.1 0.6 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1
2017 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.6 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7
2018 0.7 0.6 0.4 0.6 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 1.0 2.5
2019 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.3 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 0.1 0.3 2.5
2020 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.5 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.0 0.1 1.7
2021 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.3 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.1 0.2 0.9
2022 1.6 1.3 1.2 1.9 1.5 1.2 1.1 1.1 1.9 1.9 3.3
2023 Apr. 2.89 2.47 2.47 3.06 2.84 2.53 2.40 2.36 3.29 3.11 4.19
May 2.80 2.41 2.41 3.16 2.82 2.50 2.37 2.34 3.26 3.11 4.17
June 2.89 2.55 2.55 3.31 2.88 2.58 2.46 2.38 3.32 3.12 4.24
July 2.98 2.61 2.61 3.64 2.97 2.67 2.55 2.46 3.43 3.24 4.25
Aug. 2.92 2.58 2.58 3.42 3.01 2.71 2.60 2.55 3.44 3.31 4.27
Sep. 3.18 2.75 2.75 3.57 3.11 2.82 2.71 2.66 3.51 3.42 4.39
Oct. 3.18 2.86 2.86 3.66 3.25 2.96 2.84 2.82 3.66 3.63 4.56
Nov. 3.01 2.61 2.61 3.53 3.02 2.75 2.64 2.60 3.40 3.37 4.23
1 Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of
over 4 years. Structured debt securities, debt securities with unscheduled redemption,
zero coupon bonds, floating rate notes and bonds not denominated in Euro are not
included. Group yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the
amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figuresare calculated on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual
figures are the unweighted means of the monthly figures. Adjustment of the scope of
securities included on 1 May 2020.  2 Only debt securities eligible as underlying
instruments for futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages.
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds  1 (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the
general publicCredit institutions
including building
and loan associations  2 Other sectors  3
of which:
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases Total TotalMoney
market
fundsSecur-
ities-
based
fundsReal
estate
fundsSpecial-
ised
fundsForeign
funds  4 Total Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
shares Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
sharesNon-resi-
dents  5
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 – 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,598
2011 46,512 45,221 –1,340 – 379 –2,037 1,562 46,561 1,290 39,474 –7,576 – 694 47,050 1,984 7,035
2012 111,236 89,942 2,084 –1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 –3,062 –1,562 117,738 22,855 –3,437
2013 123,736 91,337 9,184 – 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,710
2014 137,294 97,711 3,998 – 473 862 1,000 93,713 39,583 141,134 819 –1,745 140,315 41,328 –3,841
2015 189,802 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 43,665 181,932 7,362 494 174,570 43,171 7,870
2016 149,288 119,369 21,301 – 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 29,919 156,236 2,877 –3,172 153,359 33,091 –6,948
2017 148,214 94,921 29,560 – 235 21,970 4,406 65,361 53,292 150,740 4,938 1,048 145,802 52,244 –2,526
2018 108,293 103,694 15,279 377 4,166 6,168 88,415 4,599 114,973 2,979 –2,306 111,994 6,905 –6,680
2019 171,666 122,546 17,032 – 447 5,097 10,580 105,514 49,120 176,210 2,719 – 812 173,491 49,932 –4,544
2020 151,960 116,028 19,193 – 42 11,343 8,795 96,835 35,932 150,998 336 –1,656 150,662 37,588 962
2021 274,261 157,861 41,016 482 31,023 7,841 116,845 116,401 282,694 13,154 254 269,540 116,147 –8,433
2022 112,637 79,022 6,057 482 444 5,071 72,991 33,614 115,872 3,170 –1,459 112,702 35,073 –3,235
2023 Apr. 3,367 1,130 297 146 – 61 235 833 2,237 3,340 – 247 96 3,587 2,141 28
May 8,348 6,261 1,228 – 144 1,301 21 5,035 2,087 8,074 – 49 42 8,123 2,045 274
June –1,800 –2,213 – 312 – 31 – 628 271 –1,901 413 – 437 85 – 19 – 522 432 –1,363
July 11,189 6,405 433 280 69 90 5,972 4,784 12,136 – 437 – 167 12,573 4,951 – 947
Aug. 5,374 4,731 13 115 – 107 – 40 4,720 643 5,225 132 – 129 5,093 772 149
Sep. 5,670 2,115 702 61 785 – 115 1,411 3,555 6,464 362 106 6,102 3,449 – 793
Oct. –2,604 –2,394 –1,269 – 130 – 843 – 139 –1,186 – 210 –2,713 814 – 113 –3,527 – 97 109
Nov. 219 –3,273 592 93 807 – 276 –3,865 3,492 1,303 96 – 287 1,207 3,779 –1,084
1 Including public limited investment companies.  2 Book values.  3 Residual.  4 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values.  5 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of domestic fund shares by non-residents; transaction values.— The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
54•
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2022 2023
 Item 2020 2021 2022 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 96.82 46.19 67.90 –26.90 51.95 28.96 –25.80 –13.01 24.26
   Debt securities 2.99 2.81 4.10 –0.10 3.52 0.05 4.49 1.79 1.56
     Short-term debt securities 1.27 2.29 1.23 –1.94 3.00 –0.22 2.00 1.08 –0.06
     Long-term debt securities 1.72 0.52 2.87 1.84 0.52 0.26 2.49 0.71 1.62
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 1.38 1.31 3.40 0.98 1.65 0.43 3.81 2.76 0.49
         Non-financial corporations –0.17 0.72 0.86 –0.17 0.74 0.13 0.76 –0.34 –0.47
         Financial corporations 0.12 1.08 1.79 0.73 0.66 –0.04 1.43 1.44 0.33
         General government 1.44 –0.48 0.74 0.43 0.25 0.34 1.63 1.66 0.63
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 1.61 1.50 0.70 –1.08 1.88 –0.38 0.68 –0.98 1.07
   Loans –7.34 63.05 44.18 16.30 31.37 –7.78 28.55 13.87 18.70
     Short-term loans –4.27 44.68 27.96 12.28 27.97 –14.97 20.00 11.12 16.14
     Long-term loans –3.07 18.37 16.22 4.02 3.40 7.19 8.55 2.75 2.56
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors –0.10 10.13 23.00 2.92 14.54 –2.72 37.02 9.58 17.54
         Non-financial corporations –12.27 7.11 23.94 5.52 8.47 7.51 29.88 7.51 14.72
         Financial corporations 11.58 2.38 –1.29 –2.68 5.98 –10.31 7.13 2.07 2.83
         General government 0.58 0.64 0.34 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.00 0.00 0.00
       Loans to the rest of the world –7.24 52.92 21.18 13.39 16.83 –5.07 –8.47 4.29 1.16
   Equity and investment fund shares 101.16 166.47 117.12 47.23 2.49 27.17 –0.22 31.76 19.87
     Equity 88.39 144.71 117.07 49.04 4.73 25.17 –0.94 30.01 18.77
       Listed shares of domestic sectors –77.97 15.33 44.06 7.40 34.33 –3.71 –10.51 –0.27 4.73
         Non-financial corporations –78.06 16.89 43.79 7.12 34.91 –3.82 –10.45 –0.32 5.07
         Financial corporations 0.09 –1.56 0.27 0.28 –0.58 0.11 –0.07 0.05 –0.34
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 5.01 8.32 4.98 3.61 0.30 3.10 –7.56 0.62 –9.05
       Other equity  1 161.34 121.06 68.04 38.04 –29.90 25.78 17.13 29.65 23.10
     Investment fund shares 12.78 21.77 0.05 –1.82 –2.24 1.99 0.72 1.75 1.10
       Money market fund shares 3.79 0.66 –0.38 –0.42 –1.12 2.37 –0.80 –0.41 0.59
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 8.99 21.11 0.43 –1.40 –1.12 –0.38 1.52 2.15 0.51
   Insurance technical reserves 0.37 18.01 1.64 –1.19 –1.00 –1.18 6.38 –1.01 –1.19
   Financial derivatives –27.54 15.54 28.86 28.28 10.09 –30.78 4.22 0.97 14.15
   Other accounts receivable 55.69 62.27 25.28 –33.92 –57.00 130.87 89.49 –8.81 –53.03
   Total 222.16 374.33 289.07 29.70 41.42 147.30 107.10 25.55 24.32
 External financing
   Debt securities 36.89 20.86 14.16 3.77 1.37 –1.93 1.38 2.44 1.57
     Short-term securities –4.40 2.51 –0.36 1.21 –2.73 –2.69 –0.16 –0.70 –0.84
       Long-term securities 41.29 18.35 14.52 2.56 4.10 0.76 1.54 3.14 2.41
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 18.06 9.11 5.85 1.62 0.19 –1.61 1.72 0.52 0.55
           Non-financial corporations –0.17 0.72 0.86 –0.17 0.74 0.13 0.76 –0.34 –0.47
           Financial corporations 19.80 9.09 4.46 1.86 –0.75 –1.99 0.40 –0.26 –0.10
           General government –0.22 0.09 –0.07 –0.08 0.01 0.01 –0.00 –0.07 –0.04
           Households –1.35 –0.79 0.60 0.01 0.19 0.24 0.57 1.18 1.16
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 18.83 11.75 8.31 2.15 1.18 –0.32 –0.35 1.93 1.02
   Loans 96.70 135.14 188.11 40.98 80.04 32.92 15.85 32.32 2.14
     Short-term loans –2.81 81.64 85.19 21.69 47.79 –12.53 4.34 16.12 –0.23
     Long-term loans 99.51 53.50 102.92 19.29 32.25 45.45 11.51 16.19 2.37
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 38.35 76.93 164.55 36.11 72.30 18.84 49.46 18.66 9.14
         Non-financial corporations –12.27 7.11 23.94 5.52 8.47 7.51 29.88 7.51 14.72
         Financial corporations 14.97 56.66 119.57 27.63 37.17 21.65 27.49 15.90 –0.04
         General government 35.65 13.16 21.04 2.96 26.66 –10.33 –7.91 –4.75 –5.54
       Loans from the rest of the world 58.34 58.21 23.55 4.87 7.73 14.08 –33.61 13.65 –7.00
   Equity 60.37 61.44 14.81 8.99 3.48 –0.77 –6.03 3.51 5.37
     Listed shares of domestic sectors –62.25 26.44 57.01 10.14 33.32 0.59 –14.05 –5.07 2.64
       Non-financial corporations –78.06 16.89 43.79 7.12 34.91 –3.82 –10.45 –0.32 5.07
       Financial corporations 3.46 –2.39 2.17 –1.43 –4.47 2.89 –0.67 –4.55 –1.18
       General government 0.26 –0.09 0.76 0.24 0.25 0.10 –1.18 –0.21 –0.05
       Households 12.08 12.04 10.29 4.21 2.63 1.42 –1.75 0.00 –1.20
     Listed shares of the rest of the world 10.09 18.88 –9.47 –2.10 8.05 –2.62 2.29 7.32 0.91
     Other equity  1 112.54 16.11 –32.73 0.95 –37.89 1.26 5.72 1.26 1.82
   Insurance technical reserves 5.83 4.26 3.53 0.88 0.88 0.89 0.88 0.88 0.88
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.54 14.32 –14.10 –0.27 1.80 –13.34 1.58 2.08 2.72
   Other accounts payable 23.46 138.61 65.83 12.43 20.81 18.36 10.94 4.38 0.33
   Total 223.80 374.63 272.34 66.78 108.37 36.13 24.59 45.60 13.02
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
55•
IX. Financial accounts
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2022 2023
 Item 2020 2021 2022 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 717.4 727.5 795.3 698.7 767.4 795.3 744.3 652.6 730.3
   Debt securities 51.5 54.3 53.8 51.3 53.7 53.8 58.9 60.4 61.9
     Short-term debt securities 4.8 7.1 8.4 5.6 8.6 8.4 10.4 11.3 11.3
     Long-term debt securities 46.7 47.2 45.5 45.7 45.0 45.5 48.5 49.1 50.6
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 22.1 23.3 24.7 23.0 24.1 24.7 28.7 31.4 31.8
         Non-financial corporations 4.7 5.3 5.8 4.9 5.5 5.8 6.5 6.2 5.7
         Financial corporations 13.4 14.5 15.0 14.7 14.9 15.0 16.6 18.0 18.3
         General government 4.0 3.5 3.9 3.5 3.6 3.9 5.6 7.2 7.8
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 29.4 31.0 29.2 28.2 29.6 29.2 30.2 29.0 30.1
   Loans 725.1 780.5 827.2 806.5 840.9 827.2 855.2 869.0 889.1
     Short-term loans 571.1 611.2 640.8 629.8 660.0 640.8 660.1 670.7 687.8
     Long-term loans 154.1 169.3 186.4 176.7 180.9 186.4 195.1 198.3 201.3
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 412.5 422.6 445.6 433.8 448.3 445.6 482.6 492.2 509.7
         Non-financial corporations 327.6 334.7 358.7 342.7 351.1 358.7 388.5 396.0 410.8
         Financial corporations 76.9 79.3 78.0 82.4 88.3 78.0 85.2 87.2 90.1
         General government 7.9 8.6 8.9 8.8 8.8 8.9 8.9 8.9 8.9
       Loans to the rest of the world 312.7 357.9 381.6 372.7 392.6 381.6 372.6 376.8 379.3
   Equity and investment fund shares 2,567.8 2,860.0 2,618.4 2,700.9 2,670.7 2,618.4 2,692.0 2,714.2 2,660.6
     Equity 2,363.1 2,619.8 2,405.8 2,483.4 2,458.8 2,405.8 2,473.4 2,488.8 2,435.1
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 307.0 393.0 331.8 305.0 307.5 331.8 361.1 354.8 330.1
         Non-financial corporations 298.9 384.9 324.5 298.2 301.7 324.5 353.9 347.0 322.9
         Financial corporations 8.1 8.0 7.4 6.8 5.7 7.4 7.2 7.8 7.2
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 66.6 74.7 72.2 68.7 67.5 72.2 66.9 67.1 57.5
       Other equity  1 1,989.5 2,152.2 2,001.8 2,109.7 2,083.9 2,001.8 2,045.3 2,066.8 2,047.4
     Investment fund shares 204.7 240.2 212.6 217.5 211.9 212.6 218.6 225.4 225.6
       Money market fund shares 7.0 7.6 7.2 6.0 4.9 7.2 6.5 6.1 6.8
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 197.8 232.6 205.4 211.5 207.0 205.4 212.1 219.3 218.8
   Insurance technical reserves 62.1 64.8 41.0 45.2 42.9 41.0 47.3 46.4 45.5
   Financial derivatives 30.9 106.0 92.2 164.4 199.0 92.2 65.6 56.9 44.7
   Other accounts receivable 1,242.9 1,452.5 1,518.7 1,515.8 1,528.5 1,518.7 1,574.3 1,572.1 1,600.4
   Total 5,397.9 6,045.6 5,946.7 5,982.8 6,103.1 5,946.7 6,037.6 5,971.7 6,032.4
 Liabilities
   Debt securities 238.3 252.3 228.7 229.7 226.7 228.7 231.2 234.8 234.8
     Short-term securities 7.1 9.6 9.3 14.7 12.0 9.3 9.1 8.4 7.5
     Long-term securities 231.2 242.7 219.4 215.1 214.7 219.4 222.1 226.4 227.3
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 96.1 100.6 90.9 92.5 90.3 90.9 93.4 94.0 93.5
         Non-financial corporations 4.7 5.3 5.8 4.9 5.5 5.8 6.5 6.2 5.7
         Financial corporations 78.2 83.2 73.4 76.7 73.8 73.4 74.4 74.3 73.3
         General government 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.2
         Households 12.8 11.8 11.4 10.6 10.7 11.4 12.2 13.3 14.3
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 142.3 151.7 137.8 137.2 136.4 137.8 137.7 140.8 141.3
   Loans 2,269.5 2,401.7 2,593.9 2,483.5 2,570.7 2,593.9 2,607.8 2,633.3 2,638.7
     Short-term loans 830.0 903.3 991.9 958.5 1,010.9 991.9 994.2 1,010.6 1,011.7
     Long-term loans 1,439.5 1,498.4 1,602.1 1,525.0 1,559.8 1,602.1 1,613.6 1,622.7 1,627.0
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 1,390.7 1,468.8 1,633.7 1,540.6 1,614.3 1,633.7 1,680.1 1,698.1 1,709.1
         Non-financial corporations 327.6 334.7 358.7 342.7 351.1 358.7 388.5 396.0 410.8
         Financial corporations 961.3 1,019.4 1,139.6 1,078.8 1,117.4 1,139.6 1,163.9 1,179.1 1,181.1
         General government 101.9 114.7 135.5 119.1 145.8 135.5 127.8 122.9 117.2
       Loans from the rest of the world 878.8 932.9 960.2 942.9 956.4 960.2 927.7 935.3 929.6
   Equity 3,260.9 3,689.0 2,981.1 2,994.2 2,843.1 2,981.1 3,264.2 3,259.2 3,100.7
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 739.9 924.8 761.4 733.9 691.4 761.4 855.9 821.8 762.7
       Non-financial corporations 298.9 384.9 324.5 298.2 301.7 324.5 353.9 347.0 322.9
       Financial corporations 171.9 210.3 151.2 161.8 138.1 151.2 182.3 165.2 152.0
       General government 56.3 69.9 69.2 70.7 61.4 69.2 78.9 75.3 70.9
       Households 212.8 259.7 216.4 203.2 190.2 216.4 240.9 234.3 216.8
     Listed shares of the rest of the world 995.6 1,126.3 823.1 795.3 732.0 823.1 941.1 976.0 926.2
     Other equity  1 1,525.5 1,637.9 1,396.6 1,465.0 1,419.7 1,396.6 1,467.2 1,461.4 1,411.8
   Insurance technical reserves 283.1 287.4 290.9 289.2 290.0 290.9 291.8 292.7 293.6
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 83.4 137.9 73.3 142.4 169.0 73.3 44.7 39.5 15.0
   Other accounts payable 1,276.0 1,524.8 1,604.1 1,565.3 1,654.8 1,604.1 1,601.2 1,620.1 1,680.5
   Total 7,411.2 8,293.2 7,772.0 7,704.3 7,754.4 7,772.0 8,040.9 8,079.6 7,963.2
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
56•
IX. Financial accounts
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2022 2023
 Item 2020 2021 2022 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 213.31 146.18 111.83 27.31 33.06 40.72 –11.01 26.09 14.35
     Currency 61.94 60.57 44.97 11.50 13.69 6.15 2.80 3.94 1.70
     Deposits 151.36 85.61 66.86 15.81 19.37 34.57 –13.81 22.15 12.65
       Transferable deposits 165.34 90.84 47.63 23.73 20.48 4.41 –60.51 –18.16 –32.67
       Time deposits 1.29 –5.09 35.17 –4.31 6.22 33.10 50.22 43.29 44.18
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) –15.26 –0.13 –15.94 –3.61 –7.32 –2.95 –3.52 –2.99 1.14
   Debt securities –5.94 –5.89 25.03 4.85 5.36 11.96 29.74 20.45 14.76
     Short-term debt securities 0.08 0.31 2.01 0.06 0.17 1.79 7.99 6.12 3.72
     Long-term debt securities –6.02 –6.20 23.02 4.80 5.18 10.17 21.74 14.33 11.04
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors –2.55 –3.70 20.31 3.77 3.76 10.52 25.57 16.76 12.13
         Non-financial corporations –1.32 –0.83 0.50 –0.02 0.21 0.23 0.52 1.11 1.09
         Financial corporations –1.25 –2.57 17.47 3.18 2.94 9.01 21.52 12.75 9.47
         General government 0.02 –0.30 2.35 0.61 0.61 1.29 3.52 2.90 1.57
       Debt securities of the rest of the world –3.38 –2.19 4.72 1.08 1.60 1.44 4.17 3.70 2.63
   Equity and investment fund shares 90.20 136.69 78.09 22.22 9.21 15.59 12.05 10.72 8.17
     Equity 48.53 31.80 26.89 9.88 3.98 4.97 0.11 0.36 1.08
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 16.06 14.29 12.38 5.54 3.36 0.70 –0.91 0.01 –1.29
         Non-financial corporations 11.92 12.71 9.96 3.90 2.68 1.36 –2.03 0.09 –0.28
         Financial corporations 4.14 1.58 2.42 1.64 0.67 –0.66 1.12 –0.08 –1.00
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 23.29 10.83 8.55 2.35 –0.45 3.04 0.44 –0.21 1.82
       Other equity  1 9.19 6.69 5.96 1.99 1.07 1.23 0.57 0.56 0.54
     Investment fund shares 41.67 104.88 51.19 12.33 5.23 10.62 11.94 10.36 7.10
       Money market fund shares 0.09 0.19 0.82 0.28 0.12 0.44 0.43 1.47 1.58
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 41.58 104.70 50.37 12.05 5.11 10.18 11.50 8.89 5.51
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 18.34 20.31 –0.46 –1.85 –1.30 –1.81 6.45 –0.72 –0.77
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 47.71 51.63 31.70 5.62 12.12 7.39 1.45 0.79 –3.71
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 33.68 27.32 48.64 12.58 8.63 11.96 14.13 5.01 12.37
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts receivable  2 –10.46 –0.23 –1.92 0.41 0.84 –19.20 19.48 –1.61 12.67
   Total 386.85 376.00 292.90 71.14 67.92 66.60 72.28 60.74 57.84
 External financing
   Loans 83.95 98.17 83.67 27.92 25.87 9.50 2.65 5.82 6.32
     Short-term loans –5.61 0.86 2.59 1.09 0.74 0.10 0.74 –0.28 –0.49
     Long-term loans 89.55 97.31 81.08 26.83 25.14 9.40 1.91 6.10 6.81
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 85.72 99.89 79.69 26.63 23.30 10.53 2.89 6.05 6.44
       Consumer loans –4.29 –0.89 4.60 0.91 2.59 0.87 0.54 1.26 1.66
       Entrepreneurial loans 2.51 –0.83 –0.61 0.39 –0.01 –1.90 –0.78 –1.49 –1.78
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 83.17 94.32 82.56 27.94 24.46 9.45 1.80 4.69 6.41
       Loans from financial corporations other than MFIs 0.78 3.85 1.11 –0.02 1.41 0.05 0.85 1.13 –0.09
       Loans from general government and rest of the world 0.00 –0.00 –0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts payable 0.01 0.90 2.98 0.80 1.19 1.93 –0.55 –0.39 0.45
   Total 83.96 99.07 86.65 28.73 27.06 11.43 2.10 5.43 6.77
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
57•
IX. Financial accounts
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2022 2023
 Item 2020 2021 2022 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 2,860.4 3,005.6 3,119.4 3,047.4 3,084.0 3,119.4 3,107.2 3,133.4 3,149.5
     Currency 324.5 385.1 430.1 410.2 423.9 430.1 432.9 436.8 438.5
     Deposits 2,535.8 2,620.5 2,689.4 2,637.2 2,660.1 2,689.4 2,674.4 2,696.6 2,711.0
       Transferable deposits 1,674.1 1,764.4 1,811.7 1,786.7 1,807.3 1,811.7 1,756.0 1,737.7 1,705.0
       Time deposits 302.8 297.3 335.4 297.9 307.6 335.4 384.6 428.1 474.1
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) 558.9 558.8 542.3 552.6 545.3 542.3 533.8 530.8 531.9
     Debt securities 113.3 109.6 125.0 107.8 110.4 125.0 157.1 177.8 192.4
       Short-term debt securities 1.6 1.8 3.9 1.8 1.9 3.9 11.9 18.1 21.9
       Long-term debt securities 111.7 107.8 121.1 106.1 108.4 121.1 145.2 159.7 170.5
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 76.7 75.3 88.4 74.7 76.1 88.4 116.1 133.1 144.6
           Non-financial corporations 10.9 9.8 9.7 8.9 8.9 9.7 10.4 11.4 12.4
           Financial corporations 63.3 63.2 74.5 63.3 64.1 74.5 98.0 111.0 120.0
           General government 2.6 2.2 4.2 2.5 3.0 4.2 7.8 10.7 12.2
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 36.6 34.3 36.6 33.1 34.3 36.6 41.0 44.7 47.8
   Equity and investment fund shares 1,536.6 1,900.6 1,725.3 1,699.9 1,661.2 1,725.3 1,824.8 1,866.3 1,837.0
     Equity 801.9 967.8 869.3 850.5 828.2 869.3 931.7 943.4 921.7
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 243.3 296.0 255.9 236.8 223.2 255.9 282.1 277.3 262.5
         Non-financial corporations 204.0 250.4 208.7 195.7 183.3 208.7 232.3 225.9 209.5
         Financial corporations 39.2 45.6 47.2 41.1 39.9 47.2 49.9 51.4 53.0
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 180.6 249.2 209.3 214.1 210.2 209.3 227.3 239.6 235.7
       Other equity  1 378.0 422.6 404.1 399.7 394.8 404.1 422.2 426.6 423.5
     Investment fund shares 734.8 932.7 856.0 849.3 833.0 856.0 893.1 922.9 915.2
       Money market fund shares 2.3 2.5 3.3 2.8 2.9 3.3 3.7 5.2 7.0
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 732.4 930.2 852.7 846.5 830.1 852.7 889.4 917.7 908.3
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 412.2 432.5 41.3 46.8 44.0 41.3 47.6 46.7 45.8
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 1,112.1 1,162.2 1,087.1 1,152.8 1,096.9 1,087.1 1,112.5 1,119.5 1,086.6
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 956.8 986.1 1,117.7 1,114.3 1,109.9 1,117.7 1,127.9 1,130.6 1,128.6
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts receivable  2 27.9 27.5 26.5 27.8 27.5 26.5 27.0 27.7 26.9
   Total 7,019.3 7,623.9 7,242.4 7,196.8 7,133.9 7,242.4 7,404.1 7,502.1 7,466.7
 Liabilities
   Loans 1,923.8 2,024.3 2,111.8 2,074.6 2,102.7 2,111.8 2,114.5 2,120.2 2,127.1
     Short-term loans 53.2 53.0 55.5 54.8 55.8 55.5 56.6 56.4 55.9
     Long-term loans 1,870.6 1,971.3 2,056.3 2,019.8 2,047.0 2,056.3 2,057.9 2,063.8 2,071.2
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 1,447.5 1,549.3 1,632.3 1,597.8 1,621.3 1,632.3 1,636.2 1,642.1 1,649.1
       Consumer loans 226.1 224.5 228.9 225.5 228.1 228.9 229.7 230.8 232.1
       Entrepreneurial loans 250.2 250.5 250.6 251.3 253.4 250.6 248.6 247.3 245.9
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,824.6 1,920.3 2,004.0 1,968.8 1,995.3 2,004.0 2,005.8 2,010.5 2,016.9
       Loans from financial corporations other than MFIs 99.1 104.0 107.8 105.8 107.4 107.8 108.8 109.7 110.2
       Loans from general government and rest of the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts payable 19.5 20.3 23.4 20.3 21.5 23.4 22.9 22.5 22.9
   Total 1,943.3 2,044.6 2,135.2 2,094.9 2,124.2 2,135.2 2,137.4 2,142.7 2,150.0
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
58•
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
General
governmentCentral
governmentState
governmentLocal
governmentSocial
security
fundsGeneral
governmentCentral
governmentState
governmentLocal
governmentSocial
security
funds
Period € billion As a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus 1
2017 +43.7 + 7.9 +13.9 +10.7 +11.1 +1.3 +0.2 +0.4 +0.3 +0.3
2018 +65.6 +21.0 +12.0 +16.7 +16.0 +1.9 +0.6 +0.4 +0.5 +0.5
2019 +53.0 +21.5 +14.0 +8.4 +9.1 +1.5 +0.6 +0.4 +0.2 +0.3
p 2020 –147.7 –87.1 –32.6 +6.9 –34.8 –4.3 –2.6 –1.0 +0.2 –1.0
p 2021 –129.7 –144.2 +5.6 +6.2 +2.6 –3.6 –4.0 +0.2 +0.2 +0.1
p 2022 –96.9 –124.3 +14.4 +4.7 +8.3 –2.5 –3.2 +0.4 +0.1 +0.2
pe 2023 –82.7 –72.4 –6.8 –8.5 +5.0 –2.0 –1.8 –0.2 –0.2 +0.1
p 2021 H1 –75.9 –61.0 –3.0 +1.3 –13.2 –4.3 –3.5 –0.2 +0.1 –0.8
pH2 –53.8 –83.2 +8.7 +4.9 +15.8 –2.9 –4.4 +0.5 +0.3 +0.8
p 2022 H1 – 4.6 –36.2 +18.2 +5.8 +7.7 –0.2 –1.9 +1.0 +0.3 +0.4
pH2 –92.3 –88.0 –3.8 –1.1 +0.6 –4.7 –4.4 –0.2 –0.1 +0.0
pe 2023 H1 –32.9 –38.3 –0.1 –4.9 +10.4 –1.6 –1.9 –0.0 –0.2 +0.5
Debt level 2 End of year or quarter
2017 2,130.3 1,361.5 616.8 168.3 0.8 65.2 41.7 18.9 5.2 0.0
2018 2,083.7 1,334.5 603.2 162.2 0.7 61.9 39.7 17.9 4.8 0.0
2019 2,069.9 1,312.3 612.7 161.4 0.9 59.6 37.8 17.6 4.6 0.0
p 2020 2,340.8 1,526.5 664.4 163.2 7.6 68.8 44.8 19.5 4.8 0.2
p 2021 2,495.5 1,679.3 665.3 165.3 0.6 69.0 46.4 18.4 4.6 0.0
p 2022 2,561.7 1,776.0 634.2 172.2 2.8 66.1 45.8 16.4 4.4 0.1
p 2022 Q1 2,499.1 1,684.3 663.4 164.9 3.4 67.6 45.6 17.9 4.5 0.1
pQ2 2,537.4 1,723.4 660.2 166.8 3.7 67.4 45.8 17.5 4.4 0.1
pQ3 2,551.3 1,757.0 643.8 166.6 4.2 66.8 46.0 16.9 4.4 0.1
pQ4 2,561.7 1,776.0 634.2 172.2 2.8 66.1 45.8 16.4 4.4 0.1
p 2023 Q1 2,586.9 1,798.4 631.9 173.1 3.5 65.7 45.6 16.0 4.4 0.1
pQ2 2,587.3 1,806.9 624.2 172.9 2.7 64.7 45.2 15.6 4.3 0.1
pQ3 2,631.0 1,852.4 621.5 175.5 3.8 64.8 45.6 15.3 4.3 0.1
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations.  1 The deficit/surplus in
accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. In connection with
the publication of the 2023 annual figures, no revised figures were released for the firsthalf of the year. Therefore, the 2023 half-year figures are not directly compatible with
the annual figures.  2 Quarterly GDP ratios are based on the national output of the four
preceding quarters.
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts *
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Period Total TaxesSocial con-
tributions Other TotalSocial
benefitsCompen-
sation of
employeesInter-
mediate
consumptionGross
capital
formation Interest OtherDeficit/
surplusMemo item:
Total tax
burden  1
€ billion
2017 1,486.9 773.3 549.5 164.2 1,443.3 784.8 250.6 169.5 71.6 33.8 132.9 +43.7 1,329.5
2018 1,557.2 808.1 572.6 176.6 1,491.6 805.6 260.3 176.4 78.5 31.2 139.7 +65.6 1,387.7
2019 1,616.5 834.7 598.2 183.6 1,563.4 846.2 273.6 187.4 84.2 27.4 144.5 +53.0 1,440.0
p 2020 1,569.9 781.7 608.1 180.1 1,717.6 904.5 285.2 211.3 92.9 21.7 201.9 –147.7 1,396.7
p 2021 1,712.9 889.0 632.1 191.8 1,842.6 941.1 295.4 226.6 92.5 21.1 266.0 –129.7 1,528.7
p 2022 1,821.2 955.9 666.8 198.6 1,918.1 974.0 307.9 238.4 100.9 26.5 270.4 –96.9 1,633.4
pe 2023 1,904.2 966.4 709.7 228.1 1,986.9 1,021.5 326.8 255.3 109.3 36.3 237.6 –82.7 1,685.0
As a percentage of GDP
2017 45.5 23.7 16.8 5.0 44.2 24.0 7.7 5.2 2.2 1.0 4.1 +1.3 40.7
2018 46.3 24.0 17.0 5.2 44.3 23.9 7.7 5.2 2.3 0.9 4.1 +1.9 41.2
2019 46.5 24.0 17.2 5.3 45.0 24.4 7.9 5.4 2.4 0.8 4.2 +1.5 41.4
p 2020 46.1 23.0 17.9 5.3 50.5 26.6 8.4 6.2 2.7 0.6 5.9 –4.3 41.0
p 2021 47.3 24.6 17.5 5.3 50.9 26.0 8.2 6.3 2.6 0.6 7.4 –3.6 42.3
p 2022 47.0 24.7 17.2 5.1 49.5 25.1 7.9 6.1 2.6 0.7 7.0 –2.5 42.1
pe 2023 46.2 23.4 17.2 5.5 48.2 24.8 7.9 6.2 2.7 0.9 5.8 –2.0 40.9
Percentage growth rates
2017 +4.2 +4.6 +4.8 +0.5 +3.8 +4.0 +4.1 +4.3 +5.1 –9.3 +4.5 . +4.7
2018 +4.7 +4.5 +4.2 +7.6 +3.3 +2.6 +3.9 +4.1 +9.7 –7.8 +5.1 . +4.4
2019 +3.8 +3.3 +4.5 +4.0 +4.8 +5.1 +5.1 +6.2 +7.2 –12.0 +3.5 . +3.8
p 2020 –2.9 –6.3 +1.6 –1.9 +9.9 +6.9 +4.2 +12.7 +10.4 –20.8 +39.7 . –3.0
p 2021 +9.1 +13.7 +3.9 +6.5 +7.3 +4.1 +3.6 +7.2 –0.5 –3.1 +31.7 . +9.4
p 2022 +6.3 +7.5 +5.5 +3.6 +4.1 +3.5 +4.3 +5.2 +9.0 +25.8 +1.7 . +6.9
pe 2023 +4.6 +1.1 +6.4 +14.8 +3.6 +4.9 +6.1 +7.1 +8.3 +37.1 –12.1 . +3.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office.  * Figures in accordance with ESA 2010.  1 Taxes and
social contributions plus customs duties and bank levies to the Single Resolution Fund.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
59•
X. Public finances in Germany
3. General government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:  3
Period Total  4 TaxesFinan-
cial
transac-
tions  5 Total  4Person-
nel
expend-
itureCurrent
grants InterestFixed
asset
forma-
tionFinan-
cial
transac-
tions  5Deficit/
surplusRev-
enue  6Expend-
itureDeficit/
surplusRev-
enueExpend-
itureDeficit/
surplus
2016 859.7 705.8 8.8 842.8 251.3 320.8 43.3 48.3 11.7 +16.8 601.8 594.8 +7.1 1,352.5 1,328.6 +23.9
2017 897.6 734.5 7.7 867.8 261.5 327.2 41.9 51.7 13.8 +29.8 631.5 622.0 +9.5 1,414.9 1,375.6 +39.3
2018 949.2 776.3 6.0 904.0 272.4 337.3 39.1 55.1 16.1 +45.2 656.2 642.5 +13.6 1,488.1 1,429.3 +58.8
2019 1,007.7 799.4 11.0 973.9 285.9 348.9 33.5 62.2 16.8 +33.7 685.0 676.7 +8.3 1,571.2 1,529.2 +42.0
2020 944.3 739.9 13.7 1,109.7 299.4 422.0 25.8 68.6 59.9 –165.4 719.5 747.8 –28.3 1,516.2 1,709.9 –193.7
2021 1,105.4 833.3 25.3 1,239.9 310.7 530.8 21.0 69.3 26.1 –134.5 769.2 777.1 –7.9 1,701.6 1,844.0 –142.4
P 2022 1,145.2 895.9 32.4 1,287.0 325.7 499.6 33.5 72.5 79.3 –141.8 800.6 794.8 +5.9 1,773.0 1,908.9 –135.9
2021 Q1 240.7 185.3 4.3 300.6 75.5 130.8 7.3 11.1 14.6 –59.9 P182.4 P196.3 P–13.9 P385.2 P458.9 P–73.8
Q2 267.0 195.8 7.5 297.1 74.8 122.7 10.7 15.2 10.5 –30.2 P185.9 P197.0 P–11.1 P414.1 P455.3 P–41.2
Q3 270.9 210.7 7.4 290.2 75.8 116.3 – 0.4 16.5 10.4 –19.3 P183.4 P191.9 P–8.6 P413.5 P441.4 P–27.8
Q4 332.9 237.7 6.1 347.8 84.1 153.4 3.1 26.4 – 9.4 –14.9 P197.3 P190.4 P+6.9 P492.6 P500.6 P–8.0
2022 Q1 278.2 224.0 5.0 279.3 79.6 116.8 5.5 11.9 7.0 – 1.0 P193.8 P199.8 P–6.0 P430.3 P437.3 P–7.1
Q2 288.0 224.6 5.1 294.2 77.8 126.4 10.6 15.3 5.9 – 6.2 P199.9 P196.7 P+3.2 P444.7 P447.7 P–3.1
Q3 267.9 207.0 13.3 299.0 78.1 117.0 10.8 17.7 10.8 –31.0 P194.0 P197.6 P–3.6 P418.7 P453.3 P–34.6
Q4 319.0 244.5 9.0 414.0 89.7 139.0 6.5 27.5 55.6 –95.0 P210.5 P198.1 P+12.4 P486.2 P568.8 P–82.5
2023 Q1 281.9 215.4 9.3 331.8 81.3 131.6 20.1 13.6 17.8 –49.9 P195.4 P200.8 P–5.4 P441.7 P497.0 P–55.3
Q2 311.6 218.6 9.4 313.4 84.7 118.2 24.2 17.8 2.2 – 1.8 P199.3 P198.9 P+0.4 P476.2 P477.6 P–1.4
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data.  1 Annual fig-
ures based on the quarterly figures of the Federal Statistical Office, core budgets and
off-budget entities which are assigned to the general government sector.  2 The annual
figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all pro-
visional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are estimated.  3 The develop-
ment of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in part by statisticalchangeovers.  4 Including discrepancies in clearing transactions between central, state
and local government.  5 On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as dis-
posals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this con-
tains the acquisition of equity interests and loans granted.  6 Excluding central govern-
ment liquidity assistance to the Federal Employment Agency.
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus
2016 344.7 338.4 + 6.2 380.2 372.0 + 8.2 247.1 241.7 + 5.4
2017 357.8 352.8 + 5.0 396.7 385.5 +11.3 258.5 247.7 +10.7
2018 374.4 363.5 +10.9 419.6 399.8 +19.9 270.0 260.1 + 9.8
2019 382.5 369.2 +13.3 436.3 419.3 +17.0 282.4 276.7 + 5.7
2020 341.4 472.1 –130.7 455.5 489.0 –33.6 295.2 293.2 + 2.0
2021 370.3 511.9 –141.6 509.3 508.7 + 0.5 308.0 303.4 + 4.6
2022 399.6 515.6 –116.0 534.8 522.5 +12.3 328.5 325.8 + 2.7
2021 Q1 75.0 127.5 –52.5 113.7 120.7 – 7.1 61.1 69.7 – 8.6
Q2 86.4 123.5 –37.1 122.8 122.0 + 0.8 74.6 71.7 + 2.9
Q3 93.9 114.7 –20.7 125.9 120.2 + 5.7 74.6 74.9 – 0.3
Q4 115.1 146.3 –31.2 145.6 144.5 + 1.2 97.6 87.0 +10.6
2022 Q1 94.7 114.0 –19.3 134.6 122.7 +11.9 68.4 73.8 – 5.4
Q2 99.7 123.5 –23.7 133.2 123.6 + 9.6 81.0 77.3 + 3.7
Q3 89.0 127.8 –38.7 126.1 121.4 + 4.7 81.1 80.3 + 0.8
Q4 116.1 150.4 –34.2 139.6 153.4 –13.8 98.0 94.5 + 3.5
2023 Q1 96.2 116.9 –20.7 121.0 122.3 – 1.3 73.3 81.0 – 7.7
Q2 101.8 119.8 –18.0 138.5 133.6 + 4.9 87.0 86.6 + 0.4
Q3 106.1 115.9 – 9.8 123.1 120.0 + 3.2 87.4 91.5 – 4.1
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office data and Bundesbank
calculations.  1 Any amounts of the Bundesbank's profit distribution exceeding the
reference value that were used to repay parts of the debt of central government'sspecial funds are not included here.  2 Including the local authority level of the city
states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg.  3 Data of core budgets and off-budget entities
which are assigned to the general government sector.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
60•
X. Public finances in Germany
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Period Total TotalCentral
government  1State
government  1 European Union  2Local
government  3Balance of
untransferred
tax shares  4Memo item:
Amounts deducted
in the Federal
budget  5
2016 705,797 606,965 316,854 260,837 29,273 98,648 + 186 27,836
2017 734,540 629,458 336,730 271,046 21,682 105,158 – 76 27,368
2018 776,314 665,005 349,134 287,282 28,589 111,308 + 1 26,775
2019 799,416 684,491 355,050 298,519 30,921 114,902 + 23 25,998
2020 739,911 632,268 313,381 286,065 32,822 107,916 – 274 30,266
2021 833,337 706,978 342,988 325,768 38,222 125,000 + 1,359 29,321
2022 895,854 760,321 372,121 349,583 38,617 134,146 + 1,387 34,911
2021 Q1 189,316 159,271 72,814 73,137 13,320 19,882 + 10,163 6,887
Q2 191,931 163,158 81,129 74,024 8,005 29,609 – 835 7,438
Q3 211,364 180,378 87,603 84,312 8,464 29,726 + 1,260 7,823
Q4 240,726 204,171 101,442 94,295 8,433 45,784 – 9,229 7,173
2022 Q1 224,006 189,158 92,112 87,240 9,806 24,772 + 10,077 7,261
Q2 224,538 190,982 94,153 86,852 9,977 34,149 – 594 11,576
Q3 205,544 174,232 84,078 80,020 10,133 33,618 – 2,306 7,953
Q4 241,767 205,950 101,778 95,471 8,702 41,607 – 5,790 8,121
2023 Q1 220,950 186,173 93,366 83,536 9,271 26,505 + 8,271 7,665
Q2 221,225 186,597 94,492 82,961 9,144 35,152 – 525 8,959
Q3 ... 195,334 98,626 87,824 8,884 ... ... 8,678
2022 Oct. . 52,876 25,996 24,125 2,756 . . 2,374
Nov. . 52,386 25,405 23,599 3,382 . . 2,374
2023 Oct. . 52,724 26,053 23,611 3,061 . . 2,590
Nov. . 52,443 26,170 23,180 3,094 . . 2,590
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations.  1 Before deducting or adding supplementary central government transfers,
regionalisation funds (local public transport), compensation for the transfer of motor
vehicle tax to central government and consolidation assistance, which central govern-
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these amounts
which are deducted from tax revenue in the Federal budget.  2 Customs duties andshares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from central government
tax revenue.  3 Including local government taxes in the city states Berlin, Bremen and
Hamburg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms.  4 Difference between local
government's share in the joint taxes received by the state government cash offices in
the period in question (see Table X. 6) and the amounts passed on to local govern-
ment in the same period.  5 Volume of the positions mentioned under footnote 1.
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
€ million
Joint taxes
Income taxes  2 Value added taxes (VAT)  7
Period Total  1 TotalWage
tax 3Assessed
income
tax 4Corpora-
tion tax  5Invest-
ment
income
tax 6 TotalDomestic
VATImport
VATLocal
business
tax
trans-
fers  8Central
govern-
ment
taxes  9State
govern-
ment
taxes  9EU
customs
dutiesMemo
item:
Local
govern-
ment
share in
joint
taxes
2016 648,309 291,492 184,826 53,833 27,442 25,391 217,090 165,932 51,157 7,831 104,441 22,342 5,113 41,345
2017 674,598 312,462 195,524 59,428 29,259 28,251 226,355 170,498 55,856 8,580 99,934 22,205 5,063 45,141
2018 713,576 332,141 208,231 60,415 33,425 30,069 234,800 175,437 59,363 9,078 108,586 23,913 5,057 48,571
2019 735,869 344,016 219,660 63,711 32,013 28,632 243,256 183,113 60,143 8,114 109,548 25,850 5,085 51,379
2020 682,376 320,798 209,286 58,982 24,268 28,261 219,484 168,700 50,784 3,954 105,632 27,775 4,734 50,107
2021 760,953 370,296 218,407 72,342 42,124 37,423 250,800 187,631 63,169 4,951 98,171 31,613 5,122 53,976
2022 814,886 390,111 227,205 77,411 46,334 39,161 284,850 198,201 86,649 6,347 96,652 30,097 6,829 54,565
2021 Q1 171,974 86,381 50,854 17,826 10,203 7,498 54,795 45,403 9,392 252 21,712 7,757 1,076 12,703
Q2 175,242 84,505 50,783 14,347 8,860 10,515 57,634 43,399 14,235 1,215 23,210 7,398 1,281 12,085
Q3 193,910 90,619 53,857 17,973 9,853 8,936 69,528 49,052 20,476 1,189 23,469 7,813 1,292 13,532
Q4 219,827 108,791 62,913 22,196 13,208 10,474 68,843 49,777 19,066 2,295 29,780 8,645 1,473 15,656
2022 Q1 203,130 96,245 56,206 20,915 11,178 7,946 73,584 54,234 19,350 615 22,252 8,975 1,459 13,972
Q2 204,740 101,822 60,363 17,194 11,246 13,019 67,763 46,755 21,008 1,521 24,441 7,564 1,630 13,758
Q3 185,552 82,392 43,431 17,598 10,724 10,639 71,164 49,323 21,841 1,471 21,657 7,115 1,753 11,320
Q4 221,464 109,652 67,205 21,704 13,186 7,557 72,339 47,889 24,451 2,740 28,302 6,444 1,987 15,514
2023 Q1 199,764 94,453 55,669 19,728 10,700 8,357 73,522 52,197 21,325 370 23,110 6,815 1,494 13,591
Q2 199,993 98,917 59,538 15,467 12,406 11,506 67,260 47,855 19,405 1,499 24,740 6,142 1,435 13,396
Q3 208,722 98,832 56,370 17,010 9,902 15,550 76,093 56,986 19,106 1,583 24,665 6,160 1,389 13,388
2022 Oct. 56,673 22,786 19,375 1,204 593 1,614 23,210 15,358 7,852 1,175 6,866 1,986 651 3,797
Nov. 55,945 20,426 18,275 571 125 1,455 25,057 16,743 8,313 310 7,267 2,221 665 3,559
2023 Oct. 56,324 21,173 17,764 1,009 88 2,312 23,790 17,629 6,162 1,260 7,665 1,981 456 3,600
Nov. 55,988 19,655 17,983 291 –571 1,952 25,787 19,506 6,282 335 7,750 1,971 489 3,544
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations.  1 This total, unlike
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of untrans-
ferred tax shares.  2 Respective percentage share of central, state and local government
in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corporation tax and
non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on interest income and
capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12.  3 After deducting child benefits
and subsidies for supplementary private pension plans.  4 After deducting employeerefunds and research grants.  5 After deducting research grants.  6 Final withholding tax
on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings.  7 The allocation
of revenue to central, state and local government, which is adjusted at more regular
intervals, is regulated in Section 1 of the Revenue Adjustment Act. Respective percent-
age share of central, state and local government in revenue for 2022: 46.6:50.5:2.8.
The EU share is deducted from central government's share.  8 Respective percentage
share of central and state government for 2022: 41.4:58.6.  9 For the breakdown, see
Table X. 7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
61•
X. Public finances in Germany
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
of which:
PeriodEnergy
taxSoli-
darity
surchargeTobacco
taxInsurance
taxMotor
vehicle
taxElectri-
city taxAlcohol
tax OtherTax on
the acqui-
sition of
land and
buildingsInherit-
ance
taxBetting
and
lottery
tax Other TotalLocal
business
tax 2Real
property
taxes
2016 40,091 16,855 14,186 12,763 8,952 6,569 2,070 2,955 12,408 7,006 1,809 1,119 65,319 50,103 13,654
2017 41,022 17,953 14,399 13,269 8,948 6,944 2,094 – 4,695 13,139 6,114 1,837 1,115 68,522 52,899 13,966
2018 40,882 18,927 14,339 13,779 9,047 6,858 2,133 2,622 14,083 6,813 1,894 1,122 71,817 55,904 14,203
2019 40,683 19,646 14,257 14,136 9,372 6,689 2,118 2,648 15,789 6,987 1,975 1,099 71,661 55,527 14,439
2020 37,635 18,676 14,651 14,553 9,526 6,561 2,238 1,792 16,055 8,600 2,044 1,076 61,489 45,471 14,676
2021 37,120 11,028 14,733 14,980 9,546 6,691 2,089 1,984 18,335 9,824 2,333 1,121 77,335 61,251 14,985
2022 33,667 11,978 14,229 15,672 9,499 6,830 2,191 2,585 17,122 9,226 2,569 1,180 87,315 70,382 15,282
2021 Q1 4,126 3,171 2,585 6,776 2,567 1,692 395 400 4,716 2,110 578 353 17,594 13,798 3,503
Q2 8,717 2,546 4,053 2,843 2,469 1,640 528 413 4,231 2,374 538 255 17,904 13,692 4,034
Q3 9,532 2,338 3,636 2,911 2,381 1,618 514 538 4,571 2,457 516 269 18,643 14,215 4,133
Q4 14,745 2,972 4,458 2,449 2,130 1,741 651 633 4,816 2,884 700 244 23,194 19,546 3,316
2022 Q1 4,452 2,840 2,372 7,175 2,594 1,785 531 503 5,061 2,827 701 385 21,492 17,454 3,577
Q2 9,092 3,518 3,648 2,872 2,433 1,722 505 651 4,406 2,238 661 259 21,318 16,839 4,077
Q3 7,103 2,571 3,742 3,059 2,325 1,598 549 710 4,100 2,138 596 281 21,463 16,792 4,249
Q4 13,020 3,049 4,467 2,567 2,147 1,725 606 722 3,555 2,023 611 254 23,043 19,298 3,380
2023 Q1 4,362 2,888 2,669 7,637 2,632 1,749 530 643 3,362 2,368 666 420 21,555 17,471 3,610
Q2 8,796 3,649 3,830 3,091 2,475 1,669 517 712 2,937 2,323 615 267 22,731 18,117 4,192
Q3 9,477 2,607 3,879 3,309 2,339 1,749 532 773 2,997 2,302 577 284 ... ... ...
2022 Oct. 2,465 462 1,436 758 756 567 172 250 1,089 608 202 87 . . .
Nov. 3,013 436 1,014 1,049 753 576 178 248 1,207 733 207 73 . . .
2023 Oct. 3,198 492 1,451 837 699 557 171 260 952 729 216 85 . . .
Nov. 3,198 449 1,167 1,145 754 594 171 273 1,004 709 177 80 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations.  1 For the sum total, see Table X. 6.  2 Including revenue from offshore wind
farms.
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets *
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  3
of which: of which:
Period TotalContri-
butions  2Payments
from
central
government TotalPension
paymentsPen-
sioners'
health
insuranceDeficit/
surplus Total Deposits  4SecuritiesEquity
interests,
mortgages
and other
loans  5Real
estateMemo
item:
Adminis-
trative
assets
2016 286,399 202,249 83,154 288,641 246,118 17,387 –2,242 34,094 31,524 2,315 203 52 4,147
2017 299,826 211,424 87,502 299,297 255,261 18,028 +529 35,366 33,740 1,335 238 53 4,032
2018 312,788 221,572 90,408 308,356 263,338 18,588 +4,432 40,345 38,314 1,713 262 56 4,008
2019 327,298 232,014 94,467 325,436 277,282 20,960 +1,861 42,963 40,531 2,074 303 56 3,974
2020 335,185 235,988 98,447 339,072 289,284 21,865 –3,887 39,880 38,196 1,286 344 55 3,901
2021 348,679 245,185 102,772 347,486 296,343 22,734 +1,192 42,014 40,320 1,241 400 52 3,807
2022 363,871 258,269 104,876 360,436 308,168 23,792 +3,435 46,087 44,181 1,399 457 51 3,746
2021 Q1 83,066 57,351 25,542 86,048 73,799 5,600 –2,982 36,888 35,326 1,166 342 54 3,887
Q2 86,386 60,666 25,545 86,486 73,905 5,679 –100 36,941 35,554 988 345 53 3,871
Q3 85,535 59,941 25,468 87,123 74,453 5,718 –1,588 36,041 34,670 973 345 53 3,840
Q4 92,818 67,211 25,415 87,385 74,556 5,730 +5,432 41,974 40,310 1,241 370 52 3,835
2022 Q1 86,684 60,599 25,937 86,841 74,568 5,734 –157 41,784 39,952 1,367 399 65 3,783
Q2 90,040 63,978 25,879 87,138 74,644 5,756 +2,903 44,425 42,441 1,513 406 65 3,761
Q3 89,284 62,891 26,218 92,606 79,400 6,127 –3,322 41,548 39,767 1,315 415 51 3,775
Q4 96,931 70,750 25,995 93,444 79,944 6,170 +3,487 46,082 44,186 1,399 446 51 3,767
2023 Q1 91,370 64,171 26,972 92,422 79,330 6,142 –1,052 45,109 43,030 1,569 460 51 3,724
Q2 94,735 67,459 26,942 92,585 79,177 6,165 +2,151 47,245 45,043 1,693 461 48 3,705
Q3 93,776 66,300 26,950 97,619 83,549 6,513 –3,843 44,354 42,208 1,632 481 34 3,703
Sources: German pension insurance scheme and Bundesbank calculations.  * Excluding
the German pension insurance scheme for mining, railway and maritime industries. The
final annual figures generally differ from the total of the reported quarterly figures as
the latter are not revised.  1 Including financial compensation payments. Excluding in-vestment spending and proceeds.  2 Including contributions for recipients of govern-
ment cash benefits.  3 Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or
quarter.  4 Including cash.  5 Excluding loans to other social security funds.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
62•
X. Public finance in Germany
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development *
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Period Total  1Contri-
butionsInsolvency
compen-
sation levyGovernment
funds TotalUnemploy-
ment
benefit  2Short-time
working
benefits  3Job
promotion  4Insolvency
benefit
paymentAdminis-
trative
expend-
iture  5Deficit/
surplusMemo item:
Deficit-
offsetting
grant or
loan from
central
government
2016 36,352 31,186 1,114 – 30,889 14,435 749 7,035 595 5,314 +5,463 –
2017 37,819 32,501 882 – 31,867 14,055 769 7,043 687 6,444 +5,952 –
2018 39,335 34,172 622 – 33,107 13,757 761 6,951 588 8,129 +6,228 –
2019 35,285 29,851 638 – 33,154 15,009 772 7,302 842 6,252 +2,131 –
2020 33,678 28,236 630 – 61,013 20,617 22,719 7,384 1,214 6,076 –27,335 6,913
2021 35,830 29,571 1,302 – 57,570 19,460 21,003 7,475 493 6,080 –21,739 16,935
2022 37,831 31,651 1,062 – 37,530 16,588 3,865 7,125 534 6,256 + 300 423
2021 Q1 8,228 6,747 289 – 18,260 5,956 8,006 1,935 184 1,391 –10,033 –
Q2 8,830 7,301 324 – 16,720 5,029 7,495 1,912 108 1,452 –7,890 –
Q3 8,791 7,290 330 – 12,042 4,447 3,631 1,744 91 1,452 –3,251 –
Q4 9,982 8,234 359 – 10,547 4,028 1,871 1,884 110 1,785 – 565 16,935
2022 Q1 8,827 7,374 251 – 10,685 4,424 2,087 1,821 135 1,412 –1,858 –
Q2 9,327 7,857 262 – 9,457 4,091 1,215 1,794 147 1,450 – 130 –
Q3 9,278 7,740 261 – 8,401 4,056 408 1,621 107 1,506 + 877 –
Q4 10,398 8,679 289 – 8,987 4,016 156 1,889 145 1,888 +1,411 423
2023 Q1 9,836 8,442 178 – 9,942 4,727 592 1,858 376 1,550 – 106 –
Q2 10,387 8,976 186 – 9,661 4,604 380 1,902 271 1,689 + 726 –
Q3 10,361 8,804 182 – 9,351 4,712 141 1,775 284 1,691 +1,010 –
Source: Federal Employment Agency and Bundesbank calculations.  * Including transfers
to the civil servants' pension fund.  1 Excluding central government deficit-offsetting
grant or loan.  2 Unemployment benefit in case of unemployment.  3 Including seasonal
short-time working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, re-
structuring measures and refunds of social contributions.  4 Vocational training, meas-ures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, integration, compensation top-up pay-
ments and promotion of business start-ups.  5 Including collection charges to other
social security funds, excluding administrative expenditure within the framework of the
basic allowance for job seekers.
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1
of which: of which:
Period TotalContri-
butions Central
government
funds  2 TotalHospital
treatmentPharma-
ceuticalsMedical
treatmentDental
treatment  3Remedies
and
therapeutic
appliancesSickness
benefitsAdminis-
trative
expend-
iture  4Deficit/
surplus
2016 223,692 206,830 14,000 222,936 70,450 35,981 37,300 13,790 14,256 11,677 11,032 + 757
2017 233,814 216,227 14,500 230,773 72,303 37,389 38,792 14,070 14,776 12,281 10,912 +3,041
2018 242,360 224,912 14,500 239,706 74,506 38,327 39,968 14,490 15,965 13,090 11,564 +2,654
2019 251,295 233,125 14,500 252,440 77,551 40,635 41,541 15,010 17,656 14,402 11,136 –1,145
2020 269,158 237,588 27,940 275,268 78,531 42,906 44,131 14,967 18,133 15,956 11,864 –6,110
2021 289,270 249,734 36,977 294,602 82,748 46,199 45,058 16,335 20,163 16,612 11,727 –5,332
2022 315,248 262,367 50,223 310,594 85,061 48,354 46,379 16,737 21,259 17,947 12,418 +4,654
2021 Q1 72,970 59,338 13,303 72,660 19,631 11,175 11,564 4,069 4,564 4,287 2,967 + 310
Q2 71,964 61,819 9,965 74,492 20,287 11,275 11,536 4,219 5,085 4,120 2,850 –2,529
Q3 70,592 61,899 7,942 73,569 20,748 11,756 10,730 4,060 5,085 4,004 2,849 –2,977
Q4 74,020 66,678 5,767 73,209 21,340 12,043 11,252 4,062 5,290 4,200 3,109 + 810
2022 Q1 79,253 62,142 17,049 81,493 20,550 11,891 11,847 4,286 5,216 4,574 3,510 –2,240
Q2 79,112 64,611 14,280 79,269 21,080 12,053 11,753 4,249 5,335 4,457 2,958 – 158
Q3 75,516 65,242 9,804 75,011 21,164 12,221 11,384 3,956 5,352 4,441 2,996 + 505
Q4 81,512 70,384 9,091 74,894 21,659 12,242 11,566 4,310 5,442 4,486 3,148 +6,617
2023 Q1 73,718 66,513 6,759 77,593 22,196 12,209 12,012 4,370 5,621 4,927 3,169 –3,875
Q2 73,722 68,792 4,495 76,031 22,421 12,284 11,762 4,476 5,762 4,682 3,166 –2,309
Q3 75,330 69,236 5,244 76,967 22,632 12,540 11,502 4,371 5,958 4,695 3,030 –1,637
Source: Federal Ministry of Health and Bundesbank calculations.  1 The final annual fig-
ures generally differ from the total of the reported quarterly figures as the latter are not
revised. Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compensationscheme.  2 Federal grant and liquidity assistance.  3 Including dentures.  4 Net, i.e. after
deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying contributions incurred by other
social security funds.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
63•
X. Public finances in Germany
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development *
€ million
Revenue Expenditure  1
of which: of which:
Period Total Contributions TotalNon-cash
care benefitsInpatient
care total  2Nursing
benefitContributions to
pension insur-
ance scheme  3Administrative
expenditureDeficit/
surplus
2016 32,171 32,100 30,936 4,904 13,539 6,673 983 1,422 + 1,235
2017 36,305 36,248 38,862 6,923 16,034 10,010 1,611 1,606 – 2,557
2018 37,949 37,886 41,265 7,703 16,216 10,809 2,093 1,586 – 3,315
2019 47,228 46,508 44,008 8,257 16,717 11,689 2,392 1,781 + 3,220
2020 50,622 48,003 49,284 8,794 16,459 12,786 2,714 1,946 + 1,338
2021 52,573 49,764 53,903 9,573 16,511 13,865 3,070 2,024 – 1,330
2022 57,944 52,604 60,100 10,405 20,542 14,872 3,223 2,166 – 2,156
2021 Q1 12,093 11,831 13,344 2,355 3,971 3,387 725 512 – 1,251
Q2 12,933 12,329 13,521 2,287 4,030 3,421 745 510 – 587
Q3 12,624 12,294 13,390 2,393 4,182 3,466 783 509 – 767
Q4 14,853 13,242 13,595 2,475 4,270 3,646 788 503 + 1,258
2022 Q1 12,912 12,412 14,739 2,564 4,974 3,572 775 529 – 1,827
Q2 15,350 12,951 14,827 2,464 5,026 3,698 795 548 + 523
Q3 13,708 13,021 15,387 2,638 5,197 3,755 802 542 – 1,679
Q4 15,813 14,067 15,078 2,581 5,281 3,892 837 528 + 735
2023 Q1 14,283 13,169 14,698 2,876 5,377 3,846 843 570 – 415
Q2 14,227 13,668 14,392 2,745 5,539 3,940 869 561 – 165
Q3 15,585 15,228 14,823 2,867 5,776 4,074 891 571 + 762
Source: Federal Ministry of Health and Bundesbank calculations.  * The final annual fig-
ures generally differ from the total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the
latter are not revised.  1 Including transfers to the long-term care provident fund.  2 In-cluding benefits for short-term care and daytime/night-time nursing care, inter alia.
3 For non-professional carers.
12. Maastricht debt by creditor
€ million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Bundesbank Domestic MFIsOther domestic
financial corporations Other domestic creditors Foreign creditors
of which: of which: of which: of which: of which: Period
(end of year
or quarter) Total Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities
2016 2,161,570 205,391 191,880 585,375 223,407 211,515 111,843 48,712 14,182 1,110,577 1,012,273
2017 2,130,325 319,159 305,301 546,063 194,619 180,104 81,125 56,798 10,456 1,028,201 941,750
2018 2,083,675 364,731 350,487 504,476 167,506 186,346 89,794 56,071 8,725 972,052 892,222
2019 2,069,889 366,562 352,025 468,957 158,119 183,714 88,771 61,050 7,225 989,606 908,749
2020 2,340,849 522,392 507,534 505,373 157,828 191,231 99,840 54,238 8,373 1,067,615 996,417
2021 2,495,538 716,004 700,921 497,968 144,646 191,580 103,049 51,633 7,435 1,038,353 969,245
2022 2,561,675 742,514 727,298 509,106 128,892 210,888 126,042 58,444 10,782 1,040,723 975,545
2021 Q1 2,369,872 561,444 546,540 480,026 162,961 190,136 99,333 63,796 8,060 1,074,470 1,010,641
Q2 2,419,762 620,473 605,430 482,767 151,182 189,993 99,735 52,647 7,699 1,073,882 1,008,532
Q3 2,453,545 669,659 654,600 484,986 152,068 191,571 101,742 54,275 8,070 1,053,054 987,736
Q4 2,495,538 716,004 700,921 497,968 144,646 191,580 103,049 51,633 7,435 1,038,353 969,245
2022 Q1 2,499,123 737,978 722,843 481,772 143,411 194,096 106,165 50,834 6,959 1,034,442 967,915
Q2 2,537,417 759,385 744,213 485,392 133,999 202,680 115,576 53,648 8,086 1,036,311 970,548
Q3 2,551,283 741,360 726,147 515,161 126,865 202,278 116,268 53,765 8,987 1,038,718 968,178
Q4 2,561,675 742,514 727,298 509,106 128,892 210,888 126,042 58,444 10,782 1,040,723 975,545
p 2023 Q1 2,586,899 741,587 726,326 480,919 129,372 208,933 124,776 63,130 16,123 1,092,330 1,029,400
pQ2 2,587,307 719,981 704,639 462,003 126,047 209,149 124,765 63,798 20,887 1,132,377 1,069,277
pQ3 2,630,995 706,113 690,704 454,964 126,674 208,330 124,371 72,626 23,316 1,188,961 1,123,791
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
64•
X. Public finances in Germany
13. Maastricht debt by instrument
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:  2
Period
(end of year
or quarter) TotalCurrency
and deposits  1Short-term
debt securities
(up to one year)Long-term
debt securities
(more than one year)Short-term loans
(up to one year)Long-term loans
(more than one year)Debt vis-à-vis
other government
subsectorsClaims vis-à-vis
other government
subsectors
General government
2016 2,161,570 15,491 69,715 1,483,871 96,254 496,239 . .
2017 2,130,325 14,298 48,789 1,484,462 88,841 493,935 . .
2018 2,083,675 14,680 52,572 1,456,160 79,171 481,091 . .
2019 2,069,889 14,449 56,350 1,458,540 64,464 476,086 . .
2020 2,340,849 14,486 173,851 1,596,141 85,384 470,987 . .
2021 Q1 2,369,872 12,283 190,039 1,637,496 62,705 467,348 . .
Q2 2,419,762 13,065 182,676 1,689,902 69,170 464,949 . .
Q3 2,453,545 13,565 192,489 1,711,727 70,496 465,268 . .
Q4 2,495,538 17,743 195,421 1,729,876 88,481 464,017 . .
2022 Q1 2,499,123 15,676 172,809 1,774,484 70,930 465,223 . .
Q2 2,537,417 17,793 161,844 1,810,578 76,484 470,718 . .
Q3 2,551,283 22,631 149,825 1,796,620 82,049 500,158 . .
Q4 2,561,675 16,985 150,371 1,818,189 112,199 463,933 . .
p 2023 Q1 2,586,899 14,913 145,595 1,880,403 83,437 462,551 . .
pQ2 2,587,307 14,829 154,379 1,891,236 67,865 458,998 . .
pQ3 2,630,995 17,519 166,076 1,922,780 64,054 460,566 . .
Central government
2016 1,365,579 15,491 55,208 1,123,853 50,004 121,022 556 8,567
2017 1,361,492 14,298 36,297 1,131,896 48,305 130,696 1,131 10,618
2018 1,334,500 14,680 42,246 1,107,140 43,067 127,367 933 9,975
2019 1,312,338 14,449 38,480 1,101,866 29,956 127,587 605 10,301
2020 1,526,491 14,486 154,498 1,180,683 48,414 128,410 609 14,521
2021 Q1 1,552,060 12,283 167,485 1,212,495 31,284 128,513 604 22,929
Q2 1,602,137 13,065 165,374 1,259,206 36,297 128,195 647 29,448
Q3 1,630,056 13,565 170,962 1,280,586 37,116 127,826 693 31,382
Q4 1,679,310 17,743 176,428 1,300,416 57,779 126,943 618 8,078
2022 Q1 1,684,290 15,676 155,123 1,340,340 41,680 131,472 576 10,430
Q2 1,723,415 17,793 147,681 1,373,616 47,196 137,129 623 10,491
Q3 1,757,005 22,631 144,999 1,369,628 55,559 164,188 828 13,101
Q4 1,775,982 16,985 146,989 1,391,638 93,352 127,017 8,815 9,011
p 2023 Q1 1,798,377 14,913 140,499 1,456,147 59,981 126,837 3,664 10,500
pQ2 1,806,904 14,829 150,168 1,471,888 42,803 127,216 2,889 11,235
pQ3 1,852,416 17,519 160,824 1,503,891 43,413 126,770 6,373 9,852
State government
2016 642,291 – 14,515 361,996 20,482 245,298 11,273 1,694
2017 616,785 – 12,543 354,688 19,790 229,764 14,038 2,046
2018 603,166 – 10,332 351,994 19,250 221,590 14,035 1,891
2019 612,698 – 17,873 360,495 19,076 215,254 14,934 1,826
2020 664,421 – 19,354 419,862 19,481 205,724 11,924 1,410
2021 Q1 667,651 – 22,556 429,623 14,375 201,097 10,942 1,995
Q2 667,940 – 17,304 435,709 16,178 198,750 12,454 2,041
Q3 673,373 – 21,528 436,499 16,334 199,012 11,414 2,110
Q4 665,250 – 18,994 434,930 14,074 197,252 12,441 1,772
2022 Q1 663,427 – 17,688 439,767 12,533 193,438 11,634 1,915
Q2 660,169 – 14,166 442,621 12,404 190,979 11,393 1,742
Q3 643,827 – 4,828 432,653 14,873 191,472 14,067 2,147
Q4 634,152 – 3,384 432,186 9,881 188,702 11,585 1,719
p 2023 Q1 631,946 – 5,099 429,985 10,976 185,886 11,918 2,360
pQ2 624,216 – 4,215 424,818 11,908 183,276 13,336 2,041
pQ3 621,544 – 5,256 424,545 8,681 183,062 11,049 2,629
Local government
2016 166,205 – – 2,404 27,002 136,798 1,819 431
2017 168,305 – – 3,082 24,909 140,314 1,881 466
2018 162,175 – 1 3,046 20,903 138,225 1,884 497
2019 161,367 – – 2,996 19,607 138,763 1,856 532
2020 163,163 – – 3,366 18,520 141,276 1,402 330
2021 Q1 163,189 – – 3,121 17,998 142,070 2,009 325
Q2 164,321 – – 3,121 18,969 142,231 2,070 323
Q3 163,772 – – 3,000 18,156 142,616 2,127 321
Q4 165,316 – – 3,241 18,011 144,064 1,813 313
2022 Q1 164,860 – – 3,052 17,532 144,276 1,884 349
Q2 166,840 – – 2,902 17,566 146,373 1,724 370
Q3 166,624 – – 2,856 15,623 148,145 2,098 392
Q4 172,244 – – 2,896 17,917 151,431 1,614 399
p 2023 Q1 173,058 – – 2,883 17,102 153,073 2,163 422
pQ2 172,863 – – 2,988 17,678 152,197 1,746 748
pQ3 175,474 – – 2,825 18,291 154,358 2,329 796
For footnotes see end of table.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
65•
X. Public finances in Germany
13. Maastricht debt by instrument (cont´d)
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:   2
Period
(end of year
or quarter) TotalCurrency
and deposits  1Short-term
debt securities
(up to one year)Long-term
debt securities
(more than one year)Short-term loans
(up to one year)Long-term loans
(more than one year)Debt vis-à-vis
other government
subsectorsClaims vis-à-vis
other government
subsectors
Social security funds
2016 1,232 – – – 562 670 89 3,044
2017 807 – – – 262 545 15 3,934
2018 704 – – – 388 316 16 4,506
2019 899 – – – 375 524 16 4,753
2020 7,641 – – – 7,128 513 6,931 4,606
2021 Q1 16,381 – – – 15,985 395 15,853 4,160
Q2 21,395 – – – 20,995 400 20,860 4,220
Q3 24,449 – – – 24,053 395 23,872 4,292
Q4 553 – – – 131 422 19 4,729
2022 Q1 3,378 – – – 2,883 496 2,739 4,140
Q2 3,690 – – – 3,098 592 2,958 4,095
Q3 4,151 – – – 3,459 692 3,330 4,683
Q4 2,755 – – – 608 2,147 1,442 12,328
p 2023 Q1 3,527 – – – 1,411 2,116 2,263 6,728
pQ2 2,737 – – – 595 2,142 1,442 5,389
pQ3 3,755 – – – 1,600 2,156 2,442 8,917
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office and
the Federal Republic of Germany - Finance Agency.  1 Particularly liabilities resulting
from coins in circulation.  2 Besides direct loan relationships, claims and debt vis-à-visother government subsectors also comprise securities holdings purchased on the
market. No entry for general government as debt and claims are consolidated between
different government subsectors.
14. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category
€ million
Currency and deposits  2Debt securities
of which:  3 of which:  3
Period
(end of year
or quarter) Total  1 Total  1Federal
day bond Total  1Conventional
Federal
bonds
(Bunds)Conventional
Federal
notes
(Bobls)Conventional
Federal
Treasury
notes
(Schätze)  4Treasury
discount
paper
(Bubills)  5Federal
savings
notesGreen
Federal
securitiesInflation-
linked
Federal
securities  6Capital
indexation
of inflation-
linked
securities Loans  1
2007 987,909 6,675 . 917,584 564,137 173,949 102,083 37,385 10,287 . 13,464 506 63,650
2008 1,019,905 12,466 3,174 928,754 571,913 164,514 105,684 40,795 9,649 . 19,540 1,336 78,685
2009 1,086,173 9,981 2,495 1,013,072 577,798 166,471 113,637 104,409 9,471 . 24,730 1,369 63,121
2010 1,337,160 10,890 1,975 1,084,019 602,624 185,586 126,220 85,867 8,704 . 35,906 2,396 242,251
2011 1,346,869 10,429 2,154 1,121,331 615,200 199,284 130,648 58,297 8,208 . 44,241 3,961 215,109
2012 1,390,377 9,742 1,725 1,177,168 631,425 217,586 117,719 56,222 6,818 . 52,119 5,374 203,467
2013 1,392,735 10,582 1,397 1,192,025 643,200 234,759 110,029 50,004 4,488 . 51,718 4,730 190,127
2014 1,398,472 12,146 1,187 1,206,203 653,823 244,633 103,445 27,951 2,375 . 63,245 5,368 180,123
2015 1,371,933 13,949 1,070 1,188,463 663,296 232,387 96,389 18,536 1,305 . 74,495 5,607 169,521
2016 1,365,579 15,491 1,010 1,179,062 670,245 221,551 95,727 23,609 737 . 66,464 3,602 171,026
2017 1,361,492 14,298 966 1,168,193 693,687 203,899 91,013 10,037 289 . 72,855 4,720 179,001
2018 1,334,500 14,680 921 1,149,386 710,513 182,847 86,009 12,949 48 . 64,647 5,139 170,435
2019 1,312,338 14,449 –1,140,346 719,747 174,719 89,230 13,487 . . 69,805 6,021 157,543
2020 1,526,491 14,486 .1,335,181 801,910 179,560 98,543 113,141 . 9,876 58,279 3,692 176,824
2021 1,679,310 17,743 .1,476,844 892,464 190,839 103,936 153,978 . 21,627 65,390 6,722 184,722
2022 1,775,982 16,985 .1,538,628 947,349 198,084 113,141 137,990 . 36,411 72,357 15,844 220,369
2021 Q1 1,552,060 12,283 .1,379,980 814,864 189,935 103,910 134,800 . 11,026 60,687 3,857 159,797
Q2 1,602,137 13,065 .1,424,579 861,455 184,413 104,997 139,451 . 16,526 62,569 5,056 164,492
Q3 1,630,056 13,565 .1,451,549 869,195 198,692 105,398 146,533 . 19,824 63,851 5,456 164,942
Q4 1,679,310 17,743 .1,476,844 892,464 190,839 103,936 153,978 . 21,627 65,390 6,722 184,722
2022 Q1 1,684,290 15,676 .1,495,463 911,280 204,534 108,702 140,427 . 23,961 67,776 7,809 173,152
Q2 1,723,415 17,793 .1,521,297 937,949 198,472 111,343 138,495 . 29,425 70,217 11,209 184,325
Q3 1,757,005 22,631 .1,514,627 918,838 208,509 111,675 137,740 . 35,527 71,498 12,879 219,747
Q4 1,775,982 16,985 .1,538,628 947,349 198,084 113,141 137,990 . 36,411 72,357 15,844 220,369
p 2023 Q1 1,798,377 14,913 .1,596,646 987,363 213,514 120,904 127,143 . 39,459 73,591 15,497 186,818
pQ2 1,806,904 14,829 .1,622,056 1,007,004 211,742 124,160 139,012 . 50,243 59,227 13,604 170,019
pQ3 1,852,416 17,519 .1,664,715 1,021,675 226,340 125,255 148,407 . 52,763 59,923 13,863 170,183
Sources: Federal Republic of Germany - Finance Agency, Federal Statistical Office, and
Bundesbank calculations.  1 Comprises all of central government, i.e. all off-budget en-
tities in addition to the core budget, including the government-owned bad bank FMS
Wertmanagement and liabilities attributed to central government from an economic
perspective under the European System of Accounts (ESA) 2010.  2 Particularly liabilitiesresulting from coins in circulation.  3 Issuances by the Federal Republic of Germany. Ex-
cluding issuers' holdings of own securities but including those held by other govern-
ment entities.  4 Including medium-term notes issued by the Treuhand agency (expired
in 2011).  5 Including Federal Treasury financing papers (expired in 2014).  6 Excluding
inflation-induced indexation of capital.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
66•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
2022 2023
2021 2022 2023 2021 2022 2023 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
Item Index 2015=100 Annual percentage change
At constant prices, chained
 I. Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 108.2 107.6 105.5 7.4 –0.5 –2.0 0.7 –0.9 0.3 –2.1 0.3 –2.0 –3.8
Construction 97.4 94.1 94.3 –5.3 –3.3 0.2 4.3 –3.7 –4.9 –7.0 –1.6 –1.0 1.2
Wholesale/retail trade, transport and
storage, hotel and restaurant services 102.8 106.3 105.2 1.2 3.3 –1.0 8.3 5.1 1.6 –0.9 0.6 –1.2 –0.4
Information and communication 130.1 136.5 140.1 7.8 5.0 2.6 5.1 4.1 6.8 3.8 2.6 3.0 2.1
Financial and insurance activities 100.8 105.0 104.6 6.8 4.2 –0.4 4.6 3.0 2.9 6.3 2.2 –0.7 –1.2
Real estate activities 102.6 103.5 104.5 1.4 0.8 1.0 1.6 1.2 0.8 –0.3 0.8 0.4 1.0
Business services  1 109.7 112.5 112.9 4.6 2.6 0.3 6.7 1.5 1.0 1.0 –0.2 0.4 0.3
Public services, education and health 106.8 109.6 110.7 1.2 2.7 1.0 2.6 2.4 2.5 3.1 2.7 0.7 –0.5
Other services 90.3 95.7 97.4 0.2 6.0 1.8 8.8 7.5 2.4 5.7 1.7 0.9 1.1
Gross value added 106.1 107.9 107.8 3.3 1.7 –0.1 3.7 1.7 1.3 0.3 0.8 –0.3 –0.7
Gross domestic product  2 106.3 108.2 107.9 3.2 1.8 –0.3 4.3 1.6 1.2 0.2 0.2 –0.4 –0.8
 II. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 102.4 106.4 105.5 1.5 3.9 –0.8 8.4 6.0 1.8 0.2 –0.2 –0.8 –2.0
Government consumption 117.5 119.3 117.3 3.1 1.6 –1.7 4.5 1.6 0.1 0.1 –2.4 –3.2 –1.6
Machinery and equipment 103.4 107.5 110.7 2.8 4.0 3.0 0.9 0.7 9.5 4.9 7.2 4.6 1.1
Premises 110.0 108.0 105.8 –2.6 –1.8 –2.1 3.2 –3.6 –1.6 –4.8 –3.3 –1.8 –1.0
Other investment  4 116.7 115.8 115.1 2.1 –0.7 –0.6 –1.6 –1.3 –1.3 1.0 –0.8 –0.8 –0.6
Changes in inventories  5,6 . . . 0.9 0.7 0.0 –0.4 0.2 1.7 1.3 0.3 0.7 –0.3
Domestic demand 108.4 111.8 110.8 2.5 3.2 –0.9 5.3 3.2 3.1 1.2 –0.3 –0.4 –1.7
Net exports  6 . . . 0.9 –1.2 0.6 –0.7 –1.5 –1.8 –0.9 0.3 0.0 0.9
     Exports 111.8 115.5 113.5 9.7 3.3 –1.8 4.6 3.7 5.3 –0.2 1.1 –2.0 –3.8
     Imports 118.0 125.9 122.0 8.9 6.6 –3.0 7.1 7.8 10.3 1.8 0.5 –2.2 –5.7
Gross domestic product  2 106.3 108.2 107.9 3.2 1.8 –0.3 4.3 1.6 1.2 0.2 0.2 –0.4 –0.8
At current prices (€ billion)
 III. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 1,785.5 1,979.3 2,088.0 4.5 10.9 5.5 13.4 12.8 9.3 8.5 8.0 6.0 3.8
Government consumption 796.8 850.9 886.5 6.3 6.8 4.2 9.3 6.5 5.7 5.8 2.0 3.9 4.7
Machinery and equipment 227.5 253.4 275.9 4.8 11.4 8.9 6.4 7.6 18.1 13.1 15.2 11.3 6.6
Premises 406.5 463.5 491.0 5.7 14.0 5.9 18.8 14.8 13.3 9.9 10.8 5.9 4.6
Other investment  4 136.5 139.3 141.9 3.8 2.1 1.9 2.3 2.0 1.9 2.2 1.6 1.9 2.1
Changes in inventories  5 69.4 114.1 64.1 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 3,422.2 3,800.5 3,947.5 6.7 11.1 3.9 12.9 12.2 11.3 8.1 5.7 4.3 1.9
Net exports 195.3 76.3 173.7 . . . . . . . . . .
     Exports 1,710.3 1,974.2 1,950.1 15.6 15.4 –1.2 16.6 17.8 19.0 9.1 5.9 –1.4 –5.9
     Imports 1,515.0 1,897.9 1,776.4 18.2 25.3 –6.4 26.8 29.6 33.3 13.4 3.6 –5.7 –13.7
Gross domestic product  2 3,617.5 3,876.8 4,121.2 6.3 7.2 6.3 9.1 7.7 5.8 6.2 6.7 6.3 6.0
 IV. Prices (2015=100)
Private consumption 108.8 116.1 123.5 3.0 6.7 6.3 4.6 6.4 7.4 8.3 8.2 6.9 5.9
Gross domestic product 112.5 118.4 126.2 3.0 5.3 6.6 4.6 6.0 4.5 6.0 6.5 6.7 6.9
Terms of trade 99.8 95.0 99.0 –2.9 –4.9 4.2 –5.9 –5.5 –6.5 –1.9 1.6 4.3 6.8
 V. Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,918.3 2,023.6 2,158.5 3.5 5.5 6.7 6.8 5.5 4.3 5.4 6.7 7.1 6.9
Entrepreneurial and property income 851.0 867.4 923.7 19.5 1.9 6.5 4.6 –0.5 3.8 –0.6 9.7 7.4 4.2
National income 2,769.3 2,890.9 3,082.2 7.9 4.4 6.6 6.1 3.7 4.2 3.7 7.6 7.2 6.1
Memo item: Gross national income 3,756.8 4,027.6 4,288.9 7.3 7.2 6.5 9.6 7.6 5.8 6.0 6.5 6.6 6.4
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2023. Initial annual
results for 2023: figures computed in January 2024.  1 Professional, scientific, technical,
administration and support service activities.  2 Gross value added plus taxes on prod-
ucts (netted with subsidies on products).  3 Including non-profit institutions servinghouseholds.  4 Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft ware and entertain-
ment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets.  5 Including net increase in valu-
ables.  6 Contribution of growth to GDP .

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
67•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
2. Output in the production sector *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Production
sector,
totalConstruc-
tion Energy Total Inter-
mediate
goods 
Capital
goods 
Durable
goodsNon-
durable
goodsManu-
facture of
basic metals
and
fabricated
metal
productsManu-
facture of
computers,
electronic
and optical
products
and electrical
equipmentMacinery
and
equipmentMotor
vehicels,
trailers
and semi-
trailers
2015 = 100
% of total  1   100      14.04      6.37      79.60      29.44      36.96 2.28      10.92      10.27      9.95      12.73      14.14
Period
2019 102.9 112.7 90.4 102.2 101.8 102.6 106.2 101.0 102.8 106.5 103.4 94.9
2020 95.0 116.2 84.4 92.2 94.9 88.2 97.6 97.2 90.6 98.5 89.5 75.9
2021 98.4 114.3 87.0 96.5 102.6 90.5 103.6 99.1 98.9 108.7 95.9 73.9
2022 97.9 112.5 85.5 96.3 99.5 92.3 105.4 99.6 96.5 114.0 96.7 76.7
2022 Q3 98.0 116.5 79.7 96.2 99.8 91.6 105.4 100.0 95.9 117.9 96.5 75.2
Q4 100.3 119.9 84.3 98.0 93.2 100.3 107.0 101.4 93.0 116.9 105.7 83.0
2023 Q1 95.9 96.7 85.1 96.7 98.0 95.8 104.7 95.0 95.8 117.6 92.9 90.4
Q2 97.3 114.8 66.2 96.7 96.4 97.3 99.2 95.0 96.1 115.9 95.9 88.6
r Q3 95.6 116.8 61.8 94.6 94.6 93.9 98.5 95.9 93.2 117.0 95.4 78.9
2022 Nov. 105.8 124.0 85.1 104.2 100.6 106.2 113.6 104.9 100.1 124.2 106.3 95.4
Dec. 93.4 113.9 86.9 90.2 78.6 98.0 95.8 93.9 78.2 108.0 112.3 69.9
2023 Jan. 88.0 80.1 89.2 89.3 93.7 84.7 94.2 92.0 90.3 108.4 83.2 78.3
Feb. 95.1 97.0 82.2 95.8 96.6 96.1 103.2 91.4 94.1 115.9 91.8 93.9
Mar. 104.7 113.0 83.9 105.0 103.6 106.5 116.6 101.5 102.9 128.6 103.7 99.1
Apr. 96.4 113.4 73.1 95.2 96.1 94.6 101.4 93.8 96.0 113.5 92.3 86.9
May 96.5 114.7 64.2 95.8 95.8 96.8 95.9 92.8 95.4 114.2 93.8 90.3
June 99.0 116.4 61.2 99.0 97.2 100.6 100.2 98.4 96.8 120.1 101.6 88.5
2,r July 97.3 122.1 64.0 95.6 96.3 94.4 98.9 97.2 94.5 116.0 95.7 79.5
2,r Aug. 89.8 109.9 60.9 88.6 91.7 84.4 91.1 93.9 89.1 113.6 86.2 67.4
r Sep. 99.7 118.4 60.5 99.5 95.9 102.8 105.4 96.7 95.9 121.4 104.2 89.7
x Oct. 98.1 118.8 71.9 96.5 95.8 96.3 102.9 98.0 95.1 116.3 92.6 86.6
x,p Nov. 100.7 118.4 75.6 99.6 95.0 103.5 102.3 98.4 95.1 115.1 100.4 93.7
Annual percentage change
2019 – 2.3 + 3.5 – 7.2 – 2.9 – 3.5 – 1.9 ± 0.0 – 5.5 – 4.2 – 2.3 – 2.9 – 5.0
2020 – 7.7 + 3.1 – 6.6 – 9.8 – 6.8 –14.0 – 8.1 – 3.8 –11.9 – 7.5 –13.4 –20.0
2021 + 3.6 – 1.6 + 3.1 + 4.7 + 8.1 + 2.6 + 6.1 + 2.0 + 9.2 +10.4 + 7.2 – 2.6
2022 – 0.5 – 1.6 – 1.7 – 0.2 – 3.0 + 2.0 + 1.7 + 0.5 – 2.4 + 4.9 + 0.8 + 3.8
2022 Q3 + 1.2 – 2.4 – 1.1 + 2.1 – 2.5 + 7.7 + 3.5 – 1.6 – 2.0 + 8.1 + 1.9 +21.9
Q4 – 1.2 – 4.0 – 9.8 + 0.1 – 5.7 + 5.5 – 1.7 – 1.3 – 3.1 + 6.7 + 3.4 +11.8
2023 Q1 + 0.1 – 2.1 –10.8 + 1.3 – 5.0 + 9.5 + 0.9 – 4.8 – 3.1 + 7.0 + 2.6 +23.2
Q2 – 0.2 – 0.1 –20.0 + 1.1 – 5.3 + 8.6 – 6.0 – 2.3 – 2.1 + 4.2 + 1.9 +18.0
r Q3 – 2.4 + 0.3 –22.4 – 1.7 – 5.2 + 2.5 – 6.6 – 4.1 – 2.9 – 0.7 – 1.1 + 4.8
2022 Nov. ± 0.0 – 2.7 – 8.6 + 1.2 – 3.7 + 6.5 – 0.8 – 2.6 – 3.2 + 9.8 + 4.4 +13.7
Dec. – 3.1 – 7.8 – 8.7 – 1.6 –10.3 + 4.5 – 3.0 – 0.3 – 5.7 + 2.8 + 3.6 + 6.7
2023 Jan. – 1.7 – 2.1 – 9.8 – 1.0 – 6.0 + 4.8 – 1.4 – 3.2 – 4.2 + 5.6 + 2.5 +11.7
Feb. + 0.4 + 0.2 –13.2 + 1.5 – 4.5 + 9.0 – 1.3 – 4.0 – 3.6 + 7.2 + 2.8 +18.9
Mar. + 1.4 – 3.9 – 9.5 + 3.2 – 4.5 +14.0 + 5.0 – 7.1 – 1.7 + 8.2 + 2.5 +39.4
Apr. + 0.8 + 1.1 –18.1 + 2.1 – 5.1 +10.6 – 3.8 – 1.3 – 1.4 + 5.5 + 3.7 +22.2
May + 0.1 + 0.6 –20.7 + 1.4 – 5.4 +10.4 – 8.6 – 4.0 – 2.2 + 3.4 + 2.3 +22.4
June – 1.6 – 1.9 –21.3 – 0.2 – 5.4 + 5.1 – 5.6 – 1.5 – 2.6 + 3.8 ± 0.0 +10.3
2,r July – 1.8 + 0.9 –22.1 – 1.0 – 5.8 + 3.2 – 2.5 – 0.2 – 3.1 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 4.7
2,r Aug. – 1.9 – 0.5 –22.0 – 0.7 – 3.5 + 3.3 – 7.2 – 2.9 – 1.0 + 1.4 – 3.6 +12.0
r Sep. – 3.6 + 0.3 –23.1 – 3.2 – 6.2 + 1.2 – 9.6 – 8.7 – 4.4 – 3.7 – 0.4 + 0.1
x Oct. – 3.4 – 2.5 –11.0 – 3.2 – 4.6 – 0.4 – 7.7 – 6.9 – 5.6 – 1.9 – 5.9 + 3.5
x,p Nov. – 4.8 – 4.5 –11.2 – 4.4 – 5.6 – 2.5 – 9.9 – 6.2 – 5.0 – 7.3 – 5.6 – 1.8
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * For explanatory notes, see
Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tabels III.1.a to III.1.c  o Using
JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Share of gross value added at factor cost of the production
sector in the base year 2015.  2 Influenced by a change in holiday dates.  x Provisional;estimated and adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office to the results of the
Quarterly Production Survey and the Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction
industry, respectively.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
68•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
3. Orders received by industry *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Period 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change
Total
2019 104.9 – 5.1 103.5 – 7.2 105.4 – 4.2 107.0 – 2.7 123.3 + 3.7 101.7 – 5.0
2020 97.2 – 7.3 97.9 – 5.4 95.6 – 9.3 105.7 – 1.2 124.4 + 0.9 99.6 – 2.1
2021 119.3 +22.7 124.6 +27.3 116.3 +21.7 117.4 +11.1 146.5 +17.8 107.9 + 8.3
2022 126.2 + 5.8 138.4 +11.1 118.3 + 1.7 129.0 + 9.9 164.8 +12.5 117.2 + 8.6
2022 Nov. 124.4 – 0.7 135.4 + 1.9 117.0 – 3.1 129.4 + 3.9 149.6 ± 0.0 122.8 + 5.7
Dec. 121.3 – 1.9 127.6 + 6.2 118.6 – 6.5 112.0 – 2.1 139.7 – 6.2 102.9 – 0.2
2023 Jan. 125.8 – 5.3 139.2 – 3.5 118.1 – 6.9 122.2 – 3.4 135.6 –11.9 117.8 + 0.3
Feb. 128.9 + 0.1 133.7 – 2.1 126.3 + 1.9 125.8 – 2.4 154.0 + 0.1 116.6 – 3.4
Mar. 130.2 – 6.3 138.7 – 9.4 124.8 – 3.4 132.5 – 8.9 168.5 –13.0 120.6 – 6.9
Apr. 115.9 – 6.1 128.6 –10.0 107.6 – 1.9 118.6 –13.0 156.4 –17.1 106.1 –10.9
May 121.4 – 2.0 124.5 –10.8 120.1 + 5.5 117.1 – 8.2 133.2 –25.5 111.8 + 1.2
June 136.6 + 5.6 128.4 – 9.8 142.7 +18.5 128.6 – 5.4 153.1 – 9.0 120.6 – 3.8
July 116.3 – 8.9 120.0 –16.4 113.1 – 4.9 123.6 + 2.4 128.6 –14.3 122.1 +10.0
Aug. 107.4 – 6.2 112.0 –12.8 102.1 – 2.7 127.4 + 4.3 151.2 – 6.1 119.6 + 9.3
Sep. 119.4 – 3.5 120.6 – 8.6 118.6 + 1.3 119.6 –11.0 143.9 –13.5 111.7 – 9.8
Oct. 116.6 – 7.1 122.0 – 9.5 112.1 – 6.0 125.1 – 3.0 145.3 –16.3 118.5 + 3.8
p Nov. 119.3 – 4.1 123.2 – 9.0 115.6 – 1.2 128.6 – 0.6 164.4 + 9.9 116.8 – 4.9
From the domestic market
2019 101.2 – 5.6 99.1 – 8.7 103.0 – 3.4 101.2 – 1.7 116.2 + 1.3 96.2 – 2.7
2020 94.9 – 6.2 94.2 – 4.9 95.1 – 7.7 97.9 – 3.3 105.5 – 9.2 95.4 – 0.8
2021 115.5 +21.7 119.6 +27.0 113.1 +18.9 108.0 +10.3 114.9 + 8.9 105.6 +10.7
2022 122.7 + 6.2 135.4 +13.2 112.6 – 0.4 118.2 + 9.4 125.0 + 8.8 115.9 + 9.8
2022 Nov. 123.2 + 3.2 134.4 + 6.1 113.3 – 0.4 125.7 + 8.9 128.2 + 9.0 124.8 + 8.9
Dec. 115.5 – 3.0 127.6 +14.4 108.6 –14.9 92.1 –12.6 99.3 – 2.6 89.7 –15.9
2023 Jan. 121.5 – 2.6 137.4 – 0.9 110.5 – 3.0 105.0 –10.7 105.7 – 9.0 104.8 –11.3
Feb. 125.8 + 2.0 133.3 + 0.8 121.4 + 4.3 111.8 – 5.6 113.6 – 3.4 111.2 – 6.3
Mar. 130.1 – 6.0 137.0 – 7.9 126.0 – 3.7 118.6 – 8.9 133.1 – 6.8 113.7 – 9.8
Apr. 117.5 – 4.9 132.5 – 4.3 106.9 – 2.6 102.9 –21.1 118.9 –13.7 97.5 –23.9
May 122.9 + 0.3 124.7 – 8.6 124.0 +10.7 104.9 – 7.3 110.5 –19.9 103.0 – 1.7
June 125.2 – 0.3 120.3 –12.2 132.6 +14.3 104.3 –16.4 103.1 –19.1 104.7 –15.4
July 114.4 – 8.1 118.2 –17.8 112.2 + 1.9 107.2 – 3.0 107.4 –13.9 107.1 + 1.3
Aug. 105.0 – 4.7 112.5 –10.0 98.5 + 0.6 106.2 – 1.8 112.0 – 7.7 104.3 + 0.6
Sep. 107.7 –10.8 112.7 –12.6 103.4 – 8.4 107.4 –14.6 118.2 – 4.3 103.7 –18.0
Oct. 111.4 – 7.5 120.3 –10.0 103.6 – 4.9 112.1 – 8.0 106.2 –14.1 114.1 – 5.8
p Nov. 116.0 – 5.8 123.4 – 8.2 111.0 – 2.0 107.3 –14.6 111.3 –13.2 106.0 –15.1
From abroad
2019 107.6 – 4.8 108.3 – 5.5 106.9 – 4.6 111.5 – 3.5 129.0 + 5.6 105.9 – 6.6
2020 98.9 – 8.1 102.0 – 5.8 95.9 –10.3 111.8 + 0.3 139.6 + 8.2 102.8 – 2.9
2021 122.2 +23.6 130.1 +27.5 118.2 +23.3 124.8 +11.6 171.9 +23.1 109.6 + 6.6
2022 128.8 + 5.4 141.6 + 8.8 121.8 + 3.0 137.4 +10.1 196.8 +14.5 118.2 + 7.8
2022 Nov. 125.3 – 3.5 136.5 – 2.2 119.2 – 4.6 132.3 + 0.6 166.8 – 4.9 121.2 + 3.2
Dec. 125.7 – 1.1 127.7 – 1.5 124.6 – 1.5 127.4 + 4.9 172.2 – 7.8 113.0 +12.5
2023 Jan. 129.1 – 7.3 141.2 – 6.0 122.7 – 8.9 135.5 + 1.6 159.7 –13.4 127.8 + 9.3
Feb. 131.3 – 1.2 134.2 – 5.0 129.2 + 0.6 136.7 – 0.2 186.5 + 1.9 120.7 – 1.2
Mar. 130.3 – 6.4 140.5 –11.0 124.0 – 3.3 143.2 – 8.9 196.9 –16.1 125.9 – 4.8
Apr. 114.6 – 7.0 124.3 –15.8 108.1 – 1.4 130.7 – 7.2 186.6 –18.8 112.7 + 0.4
May 120.3 – 3.8 124.2 –13.0 117.7 + 2.4 126.5 – 8.7 151.4 –28.4 118.5 + 3.1
June 145.2 + 9.9 137.1 – 7.5 148.8 +21.0 147.5 + 1.9 193.4 – 3.9 132.7 + 5.0
July 117.8 – 9.5 122.0 –14.9 113.6 – 8.5 136.4 + 6.1 145.6 –14.5 133.5 +16.0
Aug. 109.2 – 7.2 111.4 –15.6 104.2 – 4.5 143.9 + 8.2 182.8 – 5.2 131.3 +15.5
Sep. 128.2 + 1.8 129.1 – 4.7 127.7 + 6.8 129.1 – 8.6 164.5 –18.1 117.8 – 3.4
Oct. 120.5 – 6.8 123.8 – 9.0 117.2 – 6.6 135.2 + 0.4 176.8 –17.3 121.8 +11.7
p Nov. 121.8 – 2.8 123.0 – 9.9 118.4 – 0.7 145.1 + 9.7 207.1 +24.2 125.1 + 3.2
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; for ex-
planatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables
III.2.a to III.2.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
69•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
4. Orders received by construction *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1
Structural engineering
Total TotalResidential
constructionIndustrial
constructionPublic sector
constructionCivil
engineering 
Industrial clientsPublic
sector  2
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2019 146.2 +8.2 145.3 +10.3 150.4 +9.7 142.6 +10.8 138.9 +10.9 147.1 +5.9 148.1 +8.8 141.3 +6.6
2020 145.6 –0.4 144.2 –0.8 160.8 +6.9 130.2 –8.7 141.5 +1.9 147.3 +0.1 139.6 –5.7 143.3 +1.4
2021 159.0 +9.2 164.1 +13.8 174.3 +8.4 156.6 +20.3 158.5 +12.0 153.0 +3.9 161.5 +15.7 146.7 +2.4
2022 166.8 +4.9 161.7 –1.5 167.7 –3.8 155.0 –1.0 166.8 +5.2 172.7 +12.9 171.9 +6.4 160.5 +9.4
2022 Nov. 148.3 +2.1 134.7 –5.7 130.9 –17.9 127.0 –4.2 176.1 +38.6 164.0 +10.7 155.2 –2.7 150.9 +25.3
Dec. 166.0 –10.3 162.2 –21.0 154.8 –21.1 165.4 –4.4 174.5 –50.9 170.4 +5.4 188.5 +1.0 146.9 –16.8
2023 Jan. 132.2 –7.4 125.7 –13.6 126.8 –23.5 128.4 –4.3 112.1 –7.5 139.7 –0.1 145.8 –2.3 119.8 –1.6
Feb. 151.8 –2.5 130.4 –19.0 127.4 –27.6 133.0 –15.9 130.9 +7.5 176.6 +18.1 167.6 +1.5 148.5 +12.1
Mar. 192.7 –8.0 179.4 –14.0 155.1 –29.3 197.1 –2.0 193.1 –3.5 208.2 –1.1 216.9 –0.1 187.8 –3.5
Apr. 169.9 +3.5 147.6 –6.4 144.6 –18.8 141.7 –0.8 179.7 +22.7 195.8 +14.0 178.4 +15.8 175.6 +4.8
May 176.1 +0.1 153.5 –10.8 153.9 –15.5 147.4 –9.6 175.1 +0.9 202.4 +12.3 187.5 +9.8 176.5 –0.9
June 181.0 +3.3 164.1 –1.3 165.3 –7.1 135.5 –11.6 266.8 +51.1 200.6 +8.1 178.6 +0.6 193.1 +12.9
July 194.4 +7.6 171.0 –4.7 160.9 –6.0 166.3 –6.6 221.6 +4.8 221.7 +21.7 190.6 +0.2 219.1 +24.8
Aug. 191.7 +21.9 153.7 +3.7 140.4 –3.2 156.6 +9.5 186.4 +4.7 235.8 +40.7 241.5 +54.9 165.7 –0.1
Sep. 192.8 +17.4 184.4 +15.7 145.1 –10.7 191.4 +24.4 288.2 +70.0 202.6 +19.2 223.9 +34.8 186.2 +14.1
Oct. 171.3 +5.9 145.2 +0.1 143.3 –3.4 141.5 +0.9 164.9 +7.8 201.6 +11.2 197.1 +14.3 158.6 +0.4
Nov. 147.1 –0.8 137.2 +1.9 124.2 –5.1 140.4 +10.6 168.0 –4.6 158.6 –3.3 170.0 +9.5 134.7 –10.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; exclu-
ding value added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series – Seasonally adjustedbusiness statistics, Table III.2.f.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Excluding residential
construction.  2 Including road construction.
5. Retail trade turnover *
Adjusted for calendar variations o
of which:
In stores by enterprises main product range
Total 
Food, beverages,
tobacco  1Textiles,
clothing,
foodwear and
leather goodsInformation
and
communications
equipmentConstruction
and flooring
materials,
household
appliances,
furnitureRetail sale of
pharmaceutical
and medical
goods, cosmetic
and toilet
articlesRetail sale via
mail order houses
or via internet
as well as
other retail sale  2
At current
prices At 2015 prices At current prices
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2019 114.9 +3.8 111.0 +3.3 112.2 +2.4 106.7 +1.0 108.9 +1.7 107.1 +4.0 118.8 +5.7 138.4 +8.3
2020 121.4 +5.7 115.9 +4.4 121.4 +8.2 81.9 –23.2 106.9 –1.8 117.1 +9.3 125.4 +5.6 168.6 +21.8
2021 124.7 +2.7 116.7 +0.7 121.7 +0.2 78.1 –4.6 95.4 –10.8 110.4 –5.7 135.2 +7.8 190.1 +12.8
3 2022 134.4 +7.8 115.8 –0.8 128.3 +5.4 102.9 +31.8 107.8 +13.0 122.8 +11.2 144.7 +7.0 188.8 –0.7
2022 Nov. 146.4 +4.5 122.0 –6.1 132.4 +9.1 115.8 +10.2 134.9 –0.2 130.2 +0.4 153.2 +4.2 233.4 –0.1
Dec. 151.6 +4.1 126.0 –6.3 147.3 +7.0 124.2 +27.3 147.7 –0.1 125.8 +3.1 157.3 +1.0 213.1 –4.4
2023 Jan. 124.3 +2.1 103.7 –7.1 123.0 +4.7 84.7 +17.8 110.7 –0.8 106.1 –2.7 139.1 –2.0 173.4 –2.9
Feb. 123.4 +2.9 101.8 –6.5 123.5 +6.4 83.4 +14.1 99.7 +3.0 108.4 –3.9 134.7 –0.4 169.1 –0.2
Mar. 139.6 +0.9 114.0 –7.2 137.9 +5.3 100.3 +5.2 106.5 +3.9 129.5 –4.7 149.4 –0.3 188.9 –0.5
Apr. 138.0 +4.0 112.2 –3.8 137.6 +8.3 107.9 +6.1 94.9 +0.3 126.6 –3.1 143.5 +2.2 182.0 –1.4
May 141.2 +4.7 114.8 –1.6 140.1 +9.6 113.3 +3.0 91.8 +0.9 128.1 –1.1 147.1 +3.4 183.6 +1.1
June 138.1 +5.4 112.3 –0.5 137.1 +8.1 117.5 +11.3 95.4 +1.1 120.6 +0.4 147.7 +5.5 178.4 +2.2
July 139.6 +3.1 113.9 –1.7 140.2 +7.2 109.1 +3.3 98.2 –2.0 118.7 –3.0 152.1 +3.5 181.6 –1.9
Aug. 132.9 +2.4 108.0 –2.2 133.3 +5.5 102.6 +4.5 97.5 –1.5 111.6 –1.7 144.8 +3.9 170.1 –1.6
Sep. 133.4 +0.3 107.8 –3.5 132.6 +6.4 105.2 –10.2 104.2 –4.1 112.9 –4.8 148.9 +3.1 171.6 –9.3
Oct. 142.1 +3.0 114.9 +0.3 137.4 +4.0 121.9 +5.1 111.0 –0.8 121.6 –3.1 155.5 +6.8 197.9 +2.3
Nov. 147.2 +0.5 119.6 –2.0 138.1 +4.3 117.8 +1.7 135.5 +0.4 121.5 –6.7 153.7 +0.3 231.3 –0.9
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * Excluding value added tax;
for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics,
Table III.4.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Including stalls and markets.  2 Excludingstores, stalls and markets.  3 As of January 2022 figures are provisional, partially revised,
and particularly uncertain in recent months due to estimates for missing reports.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
70•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
6. Labour market *
Employment  1 Employment subject to social contributions  2 Short-time workers  3 Unemployment  4
Total of which: of which: of which:
Produc-
tion 
sectorServices 
excluding 
temporary 
employ-
mentTemporary 
employ-
mentSolely
jobs
exempt
from
social
contri-
butions  2TotalCyclically
induced TotalAssigned
to the
legal
category
of the
Third Book
of the
Social
Security
Code
(SGB III)
PeriodThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
changeThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
change ThousandsUnem-
ploy-
ment
rate 
in %  4,5Vacan-
cies, 
thou-
sands  4,6
2019 45,276 +0.9 33,518 +1.7 9,479 23,043 751 4,579 145 60 72,267 827 7 5.0 774
2020 44,915 –0.8 33,579 +0.2 9,395 23,277 660 4,290 2,939 2,847 2,695 1,137 5.9 613
2021 44,984 +0.2 33,897 +0.9 9,344 23,602 702 4,101 1,852 1,744 2,613 999 5.7 706
2022 45,596 +1.4 34,507 +1.8 9,400 24,135 721 4,125 426 337 2,418 808 5.3 845
2023 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,609 875 5.7 761
2020 Q4 44,994 –1.3 33,836 –0.3 9,395 23,518 676 4,194 2,433 2,361 2,722 1,167 5.9 595
2021 Q1 44,518 –1.4 33,568 –0.2 9,294 23,376 665 4,051 3,473 3,157 2,878 1,248 6.3 586
Q2 44,815 +0.2 33,718 +0.9 9,322 23,446 697 4,066 2,164 2,143 2,691 1,024 5.9 658
Q3 45,161 +0.8 33,929 +1.5 9,347 23,606 719 4,161 935 915 2,545 920 5.5 774
Q4 45,443 +1.0 34,374 +1.6 9,415 23,982 727 4,125 835 762 2,341 802 5.1 804
2022 Q1 45,199 +1.5 34,242 +2.0 9,348 23,943 715 4,061 1,033 792 2,417 874 5.3 818
Q2 45,519 +1.6 34,401 +2.0 9,372 24,056 718 4,112 337 324 2,311 777 5.0 864
Q3 45,707 +1.2 34,522 +1.7 9,405 24,133 724 4,159 103 92 2,501 804 5.5 880
Q4 45,959 +1.1 34,864 +1.4 9,475 24,409 730 4,166 229 139 2,443 778 5.3 817
2023 Q1 r45,639 r +1.0 34,614 +1.1 9,395 24,288 696 4,152 430 153 2,610 900 5.7 773
Q2 r45,906 r +0.9 34,702 +0.9 9,410 24,352 687 4,209 152 146 2,561 839 8 5.6 770
Q3 r46,003 r +0.6 934,759 9+0.7 99,420 924,397 9 686 94,243 ... 9 123 2,647 885 5.7 768
Q4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,617 874 5.7 732
2020 Aug. 44,737 –1.3 33,482 –0.4 9,367 23,218 642 4,266 2,551 2,537 2,955 1,302 6.4 584
Sep. 44,991 –1.2 33,792 –0.4 9,421 23,454 656 4,240 2,244 2,229 2,847 1,238 6.2 591
Oct. 45,076 –1.1 33,862 –0.3 9,410 23,530 671 4,229 2,037 2,021 2,760 1,183 6.0 602
Nov. 45,031 –1.3 33,899 –0.2 9,400 23,559 696 4,166 2,405 2,386 2,699 1,152 5.9 601
Dec. 44,874 –1.3 33,700 –0.1 9,327 23,478 666 4,134 2,856 2,676 2,707 1,166 5.9 581
2021 Jan. 44,493 –1.5 33,515 –0.3 9,282 23,347 657 4,045 3,638 3,294 2,901 1,298 6.3 566
Feb. 44,490 –1.5 33,521 –0.3 9,281 23,343 662 4,026 3,766 3,358 2,904 1,270 6.3 583
Mar. 44,570 –1.1 33,636 –0.0 9,309 23,397 685 4,032 3,016 2,818 2,827 1,177 6.2 609
Apr. 44,680 –0.3 33,689 +0.8 9,324 23,427 687 4,039 2,583 2,560 2,771 1,091 6.0 629
May 44,799 +0.3 33,747 +1.3 9,326 23,461 703 4,067 2,342 2,320 2,687 1,020 5.9 654
June 44,966 +0.6 33,802 +1.4 9,324 23,504 716 4,151 1,568 1,548 2,614 961 5.7 693
July 45,030 +0.7 33,731 +1.5 9,304 23,458 715 4,194 1,088 1,068 2,590 956 5.6 744
Aug. 45,101 +0.8 33,994 +1.5 9,358 23,658 722 4,153 857 838 2,578 940 5.6 779
Sep. 45,352 +0.8 34,323 +1.6 9,432 23,903 726 4,123 859 839 2,465 864 5.4 799
Oct. 45,440 +0.8 34,369 +1.5 9,425 23,965 724 4,123 780 762 2,377 814 5.2 809
Nov. 45,496 +1.0 34,449 +1.6 9,423 24,039 739 4,133 767 750 2,317 789 5.1 808
Dec. 45,393 +1.2 34,284 +1.7 9,364 23,980 708 4,112 957 772 2,330 803 5.1 794
2022 Jan. 45,126 +1.4 34,176 +2.0 9,332 23,900 711 4,048 1,123 847 2,462 903 5.4 792
Feb. 45,187 +1.6 34,243 +2.2 9,346 23,939 719 4,049 1,087 803 2,428 884 5.3 822
Mar. 45,284 +1.6 34,334 +2.1 9,369 23,999 719 4,061 888 727 2,362 835 5.1 839
Apr. 45,399 +1.6 34,368 +2.0 9,366 24,037 713 4,091 453 439 2,309 800 5.0 852
May 45,536 +1.6 34,445 +2.1 9,376 24,089 719 4,131 318 305 2,260 771 4.9 865
June 45,623 +1.5 34,445 +1.9 9,376 24,084 724 4,164 241 228 2,363 761 5.2 877
July 45,584 +1.2 34,322 +1.8 9,361 23,988 718 4,176 115 102 2,470 801 5.4 881
Aug. 45,643 +1.2 34,571 +1.7 9,417 24,169 725 4,151 87 76 2,547 827 5.6 887
Sep. 45,894 +1.2 34,899 +1.7 9,499 24,401 733 4,136 108 97 2,486 782 5.4 873
Oct. 45,990 +1.2 34,893 +1.5 9,489 24,414 734 4,161 134 124 2,442 764 5.3 846
Nov. 46,006 +1.1 34,897 +1.3 9,478 24,435 738 4,179 156 147 2,434 770 5.3 823
Dec. 45,882 +1.1 34,705 +1.2 9,414 24,357 704 4,182 397 146 2,454 799 5.4 781
2023 Jan. r45,570 r +1.0 34,550 +1.1 9,381 24,240 697 4,138 451 145 2,616 911 5.7 764
Feb. r45,633 r +1.0 34,601 +1.0 9,392 24,279 692 4,148 441 157 2,620 910 5.7 778
Mar. r45,713 r +0.9 34,679 +1.0 9,412 24,332 692 4,157 398 159 2,594 878 5.7 777
Apr. r45,808 r +0.9 34,685 +0.9 9,410 24,342 684 4,188 146 139 2,586 855 5.7 773
May r45,920 r +0.8 34,728 +0.8 9,413 24,371 687 4,228 149 142 2,544 829 8 5.5 767
June r45,990 r +0.8 34,709 +0.8 9,404 24,357 690 4,266 162 156 2,555 833 5.5 769
July r45,944 r +0.8 934,576 9+0.7 99,381 924,256 9 686 94,280 ... 9 107 2,617 878 5.7 772
Aug. r45,934 r +0.6 934,800 9+0.7 99,428 924,432 9 685 94,223 ... 9 111 2,696 910 5.8 771
Sep. r46,131 r +0.5 935,093 9+0.6 99,501 924,646 9 685 94,187 ... 9 150 2,627 869 5.7 761
Oct. r46,206 r +0.5 935,121 9+0.7 99,491 924,692 9 685 94,188 ... 9 179 2,607 861 5.7 749
Nov. 1046,219 10 +0.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,606 865 5.6 733
Dec. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,637 896 5.7 713
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency.  * Annual and quarterly
figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the official figures are
due to rounding.  1 Workplace concept; averages.  2 Monthly figures: end of month.
3 Number within a given month.  4 Mid-month level.  5 Relative to the total civilian
labour force.  6 Excluding government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs,
including jobs located abroad.  7 Statistical break due to late recording of unemployed
persons in the legal category of the Second Book of the Social Security Code (SGB II).8 From May 2023, calculated on the basis of new labour force figures.  9 Unadjusted
figures estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. In 2021 and 2022, the estimated
values for Germany deviated from the final data by a maximum of 0.1% for employees
subject to social contributions, by a maximum of 0.5% for persons solely in jobs
exempt from social contributions, and by a maximum of 61,3% for cyclically induced
short-time work.  10 Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statistical Office.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
71•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
7. Prices
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
of which: Indices of
foreign trade prices
of which:
Total Food  1,2Non-
energy
industrial
goods  1 Energy  1 Services  1Actual
rents
for
housingMemo item:
Consumer
price index
(national
concept)Con-
struction
price
indexIndex of
producer
prices of
industrial
products
sold on
the
domestic
market  3Index of
producer
prices of
agri-
cultural
products  3 Exports Imports
Period 2015 = 100 2020 = 100 2015 = 100 2020 = 100 2015 = 100
Index level
2020 4 105.8 4 110.9 4 104.1 4 99.0 4 106.9 107.6 4 100.0 4 117.0 103.8 100.0 101.7 97.3
2021 4 109.2 4 114.1 4 106.7 4 109.0 4 109.0 109.0 4 103.1 4 127.0 114.7 107.0 107.4 110.4
2022 118.7 126.2 112.7 146.8 112.2 110.8 110.2 148.3 152.4 141.2 123.1 139.4
2023 125.9 140.9 119.1 154.2 117.6 113.1 116.7 161.2 148.8 ... ... ...
2022 Feb. 113.3 118.2 109.1 127.4 110.2 110.0 106.0 138.1 134.6 121.0 116.1 128.6
Mar. 116.1 119.1 110.4 146.1 110.6 110.2 108.1 141.2 136.7 120.7 135.9
Apr. 116.9 122.2 111.3 142.7 111.7 110.4 108.8 145.2 143.8 121.7 138.3
May 118.2 124.2 112.3 146.7 112.0 110.6 109.8 147.9 147.5 143.1 122.4 139.5
June 118.1 125.4 112.5 147.8 111.0 110.8 109.8 148.4 141.7 123.5 140.9
July 119.0 127.6 112.6 147.8 112.1 110.9 110.3 156.3 142.1 126.0 142.9
Aug. 119.5 129.1 113.0 148.6 112.2 111.1 110.7 151.7 168.6 144.8 128.7 149.1
Sep. 122.1 130.9 114.5 158.8 113.9 111.2 112.7 172.5 148.7 127.9 147.8
Oct. 123.5 132.2 115.8 164.5 114.3 111.4 113.5 165.2 151.7 125.5 146.0
Nov. 123.5 133.6 116.3 163.5 113.7 111.6 113.7 155.4 158.7 152.3 124.9 139.4
Dec. 122.0 134.6 116.6 143.9 114.8 111.7 113.2 158.1 152.4 125.0 137.1
2023 Jan. 122.6 136.7 116.4 154.8 113.8 112.1 114.3 154.8 5 150.0 124.0 135.4
Feb. 123.8 139.5 117.0 154.9 115.0 112.2 115.2 159.7 152.8 149.0 123.8 132.2
Mar. 125.1 141.3 118.3 155.0 116.1 112.5 116.1 150.6 145.0 123.5 130.8
Apr. 125.8 141.1 119.0 156.1 117.1 112.6 116.6 151.1 142.2 123.0 128.6
May 125.6 141.1 119.3 154.0 116.9 112.8 116.5 161.0 149.0 139.4 122.5 126.8
June 126.1 141.2 119.5 153.7 117.8 113.0 116.8 148.6 141.6 122.4 124.8
July 126.7 141.2 118.8 153.6 119.6 113.2 117.1 147.0 142.9 122.0 124.1
Aug. 127.2 141.0 119.2 156.5 119.8 113.5 117.5 161.6 147.4 142.8 122.1 124.6
Sep. 127.4 141.5 120.1 157.6 119.3 113.6 117.8 147.1 137.9 122.6 126.6
Oct. 127.2 141.6 120.5 154.7 119.1 113.7 117.8 147.0 135.4 122.5 127.0
Nov. 126.3 142.4 120.5 151.6 117.6 113.9 117.3 162.4 146.2 135.6 122.2 126.9
Dec. 126.6 142.4 120.5 148.4 118.7 114.0 117.4 144.5 ... ... ...
Annual percentage change
2020 4 +0.4 4+ 2.3 4– 0.1 4– 4.5 4+ 1.2 + 1.4 4 +0.5 4+ 1.4 – 1.0 ... – 0.7 – 4.3
2021 4 +3.2 4+ 2.9 4+ 2.5 4+ 10.1 4+ 2.0 + 1.3 4 +3.1 4+ 8.6 +10.5 + 7.0 + 5.6 +13.5
2022 +8.7 + 10.6 + 5.7 + 34.7 + 2.9 + 1.7 +6.9 +16.8 +32.9 +32.0 +14.6 +26.3
2023 +6.0 + 11.7 + 5.6 + 5.1 + 4.8 + 2.1 +5.9 + 8.7 – 2.4 ... ... ...
2022 Feb. +5.5 + 4.6 + 3.4 + 22.4 + 2.7 + 1.4 +4.3 +13.9 +25.9 +21.7 +12.4 +26.3
Mar. +7.6 + 5.3 + 4.4 + 37.6 + 2.8 + 1.5 +5.9 +30.9 +31.9 +15.9 +31.2
Apr. +7.8 + 6.7 + 5.2 + 34.5 + 3.1 + 1.6 +6.3 +33.5 +36.3 +16.0 +31.7
May +8.7 + 8.8 + 5.6 + 37.5 + 3.0 + 1.6 +7.0 +18.2 +33.6 +33.0 +15.9 +30.6
June +8.2 + 9.9 + 5.6 + 37.4 + 1.7 + 1.7 +6.7 +32.7 +32.3 +16.1 +29.9
July +8.5 + 11.5 + 5.8 + 35.6 + 1.7 + 1.6 +6.7 +37.2 +31.8 +17.0 +28.9
Aug. +8.8 + 12.8 + 6.1 + 35.8 + 1.7 + 1.7 +7.0 +17.2 +45.8 +33.3 +18.6 +32.7
Sep. +10.9 + 14.4 + 6.4 + 44.2 + 3.6 + 1.7 +8.6 +45.8 +39.1 +16.8 +29.8
Oct. +11.6 + 15.5 + 7.2 + 43.5 + 3.9 + 1.7 +8.8 +34.5 +38.8 +13.1 +23.5
Nov. +11.3 + 16.3 + 7.3 + 40.1 + 3.8 + 1.9 +8.8 +17.5 +28.2 +34.2 +11.6 +14.5
Dec. +9.6 + 16.3 + 7.4 + 25.1 + 4.1 + 1.9 +8.1 +21.6 +32.8 +10.6 +12.6
2023 Jan. +9.2 + 16.6 + 7.4 + 25.1 + 3.6 + 2.0 +8.7 +16.6 5+28.1 + 7.8 + 6.6
Feb. +9.3 + 18.0 + 7.2 + 21.6 + 4.4 + 2.0 +8.7 +15.6 +13.5 +23.1 + 6.6 + 2.8
Mar. +7.8 + 18.6 + 7.2 + 6.1 + 5.0 + 2.1 +7.4 + 6.7 + 6.1 + 2.3 – 3.8
Apr. +7.6 + 15.5 + 6.9 + 9.4 + 4.8 + 2.0 +7.2 + 4.1 – 1.1 + 1.1 – 7.0
May +6.3 + 13.6 + 6.2 + 5.0 + 4.4 + 2.0 +6.1 + 8.9 + 1.0 – 2.6 + 0.1 – 9.1
June +6.8 + 12.6 + 6.2 + 4.0 + 6.1 + 2.0 +6.4 + 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.9 –11.4
July +6.5 + 10.7 + 5.5 + 3.9 + 6.7 + 2.1 +6.2 – 6.0 + 0.6 – 3.2 –13.2
Aug. +6.4 + 9.2 + 5.5 + 5.3 + 6.8 + 2.2 +6.1 + 6.5 –12.6 – 1.4 – 5.1 –16.4
Sep. +4.3 + 8.1 + 4.9 – 0.8 + 4.7 + 2.2 +4.5 –14.7 – 7.3 – 4.1 –14.3
Oct. +3.0 + 7.1 + 4.1 – 6.0 + 4.2 + 2.1 +3.8 –11.0 –10.7 – 2.4 –13.0
Nov. +2.3 + 6.6 + 3.6 – 7.3 + 3.4 + 2.1 +3.2 + 4.5 – 7.9 –11.0 – 2.2 – 9.0
Dec. +3.8 + 5.8 + 3.3 + 3.1 + 3.4 + 2.1 +3.7 – 8.6 ... ... ...
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data
from the Federal Statistical Office.  1 The last data point is at times based on the Bun-
desbank’s own estimates.  2 Including alcoholic beverages and tobacco.  3 Excluding va-lue added tax.  4 Influenced by a temporary reduction of value added tax between July
and December 2020.  5 From January 2023 onwards, provisional figures.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
72•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
8. Households' income *
Gross wages and
salaries  1Net wages and
salaries  2Monetary social
benefits received  3 Mass income  4 Disposable income  5 Saving  6Saving
ratio  7
Period € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
changeAs
percentage
2015 1,285.5 4.2 863.3 4.0 410.5 4.2 1,273.8 4.0 1,782.3 2.8 179.4 5.1 10.1
2016 1,337.4 4.0 896.3 3.8 426.2 3.8 1,322.5 3.8 1,841.5 3.3 187.8 4.7 10.2
2017 1,395.4 4.3 932.5 4.0 441.8 3.6 1,374.3 3.9 1,905.2 3.5 202.8 8.0 10.6
2018 1,462.7 4.8 976.1 4.7 455.2 3.0 1,431.3 4.1 1,976.6 3.7 223.2 10.1 11.3
2019 1,524.7 4.2 1,021.8 4.7 477.5 4.9 1,499.3 4.8 2,024.4 2.4 219.8 – 1.5 10.9
2020 1,515.3 – 0.6 1,021.1 – 0.1 523.9 9.7 1,545.0 3.0 2,046.9 1.1 338.2 53.9 16.5
2021 1,571.3 3.7 1,062.9 4.1 534.1 1.9 1,597.0 3.4 2,098.5 2.5 313.0 – 7.5 14.9
2022 1,661.8 5.8 1,118.8 5.3 541.8 1.4 1,660.6 4.0 2,227.5 6.1 248.2 –20.7 11.1
2022 Q2 399.3 5.8 262.3 4.6 132.0 – 2.4 394.3 2.2 544.2 5.0 55.9 –34.3 10.3
Q3 410.2 4.3 282.7 4.1 138.5 5.3 421.2 4.5 565.8 8.4 54.6 1.3 9.6
Q4 463.0 5.5 312.0 5.4 136.6 5.5 448.6 5.5 575.1 7.4 60.2 – 1.1 10.5
2023 Q1 416.8 7.1 285.9 9.2 143.8 6.7 429.7 8.4 580.0 6.9 78.0 0.6 13.4
Q2 429.5 7.6 287.7 9.7 141.0 6.8 428.7 8.7 582.8 7.1 65.1 16.5 11.2
Q3 440.1 7.3 307.5 8.8 145.8 5.3 453.3 7.6 591.8 4.6 61.2 12.1 10.3
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2023.  * Households in-
cluding non-profit institutions serving households.  1 Residence concept.  2 After
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees'
contributions to the social security funds.  3 Social security benefits in cash from the
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, pension
payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social
benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges.  4 Net wages and salaries plusmonetary social benefits received.  5 Mass income plus operating surplus, mixed
income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of non-profit
institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax and consumption-related
taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in claims on company
pension funds.  6 Including the increase in claims on company pension funds.  7 Saving
as a percentage of disposable income.
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
Index of negotiated wages  1
On a monthly basis
On an hourly basis TotalTotal excluding
one-off payments Basic pay rates  2Memo item:
Wages and salaries
per employee  3
Period 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change
2015 100.0 2.4 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.4 100.0 2.4 100.0 2.9
2016 102.2 2.2 102.2 2.2 102.2 2.2 102.2 2.2 102.5 2.5
2017 104.5 2.3 104.5 2.3 104.6 2.3 104.7 2.4 105.1 2.6
2018 107.6 3.0 107.6 3.0 107.5 2.8 107.6 2.8 108.4 3.2
2019 110.8 2.9 110.8 3.0 110.6 2.9 110.4 2.6 111.7 3.0
2020 113.2 2.1 113.2 2.2 112.9 2.0 112.6 2.0 111.6 – 0.1
2021 114.8 1.5 114.9 1.5 114.7 1.6 114.3 1.5 115.3 3.3
2022 117.9 2.7 117.9 2.6 117.2 2.2 116.7 2.1 120.1 4.1
2022 Q2 109.9 2.0 109.9 1.9 109.3 2.1 116.6 2.1 115.6 4.0
Q3 120.8 2.5 120.8 2.5 120.8 2.5 116.9 2.2 118.5 2.9
Q4 130.0 2.0 130.0 2.0 130.0 2.0 117.7 2.4 132.6 4.2
2023 Q1 115.1 3.8 115.1 3.8 111.7 2.6 118.6 2.7 120.1 5.9
Q2 114.2 3.9 114.2 3.9 112.0 2.5 119.5 2.5 123.2 6.5
Q3 126.5 4.7 126.5 4.7 124.7 3.2 120.4 3.0 126.1 6.4
2023 May 113.0 1.6 113.0 1.6 111.8 2.3 119.2 2.2 . .
June 117.3 7.7 117.3 7.7 112.3 2.9 120.1 2.9 . .
July 150.8 4.9 150.8 4.9 148.8 3.6 120.3 3.0 . .
Aug. 114.2 4.3 114.1 4.3 112.8 3.0 120.4 3.0 . .
Sep. 114.5 4.8 114.5 4.8 112.6 3.0 120.5 3.0 . .
Oct. 115.0 4.6 115.0 4.6 112.7 2.6 120.6 2.6 . .
Nov. 173.1 3.1 173.1 3.1 172.1 2.5 120.7 2.6 . .
1 Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports.  2 Excluding
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such as
annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13th monthly salary payment) andretirement provisions).  3 Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
November 2023.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
73•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
End of year/half
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which: of which: Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which:
PeriodTotal
assetsNon-
current
assetsIntangible
assetsTangible
assetsFinancial
assetsCurrent
assetsInven-
toriesTrade
receiv-
ables Cash  1 Equity Total Totalof which:
Financial
debt TotalFinancial
debtTrade
payables
Total (€ billion)
2019 2,800.6 1,769.7 586.3 737.1 333.4 1,030.9 257.5 237.6 168.4 821.0 1,979.6 1,091.2 676.3 888.4 289.8 207.6
2020 2,850.0 1,797.3 607.6 733.1 335.1 1,052.7 243.6 225.9 240.5 811.5 2,038.5 1,181.5 746.4 857.0 304.4 196.1
2021 3,292.0 1,971.6 680.1 773.8 384.8 1,320.4 272.1 261.5 261.5 994.4 2,297.6 1,206.9 772.1 1,090.7 321.4 236.7
2022 3,431.6 2,057.0 713.5 804.3 410.1 1,374.6 326.2 268.3 244.3 1,133.2 2,298.4 1,195.7 760.2 1,102.8 331.8 273.3
2021 H2 3,292.0 1,971.6 680.1 773.8 384.8 1,320.4 272.1 261.5 261.5 994.4 2,297.6 1,206.9 772.1 1,090.7 321.4 236.7
2022 H1 3,593.6 2,108.1 719.1 796.3 447.4 1,485.5 322.4 284.8 225.4 1,075.4 2,518.2 1,237.0 789.5 1,281.2 313.7 260.7
H2 3,431.6 2,057.0 713.5 804.3 410.1 1,374.6 326.2 268.3 244.3 1,133.2 2,298.4 1,195.7 760.2 1,102.8 331.8 273.3
p 2023 H1 3,322.4 2,009.5 699.5 799.0 373.5 1,312.9 343.9 263.7 234.3 1,134.0 2,188.3 1,130.8 752.5 1,057.5 327.4 259.9
As a percentage of total assets
2019 100.0 63.2 20.9 26.3 11.9 36.8 9.2 8.5 6.0 29.3 70.7 39.0 24.2 31.7 10.4 7.4
2020 100.0 63.1 21.3 25.7 11.8 36.9 8.6 7.9 8.4 28.5 71.5 41.5 26.2 30.1 10.7 6.9
2021 100.0 59.9 20.7 23.5 11.7 40.1 8.3 7.9 7.9 30.2 69.8 36.7 23.5 33.1 9.8 7.2
2022 100.0 59.9 20.8 23.4 12.0 40.1 9.5 7.8 7.1 33.0 67.0 34.8 22.2 32.1 9.7 8.0
2021 H2 100.0 59.9 20.7 23.5 11.7 40.1 8.3 7.9 7.9 30.2 69.8 36.7 23.5 33.1 9.8 7.2
2022 H1 100.0 58.7 20.0 22.2 12.5 41.3 9.0 7.9 6.3 29.9 70.1 34.4 22.0 35.7 8.7 7.3
H2 100.0 59.9 20.8 23.4 12.0 40.1 9.5 7.8 7.1 33.0 67.0 34.8 22.2 32.1 9.7 8.0
p 2023 H1 100.0 60.5 21.1 24.1 11.2 39.5 10.4 7.9 7.1 34.1 65.9 34.0 22.7 31.8 9.9 7.8
Groups with a focus on the production sector (€ billion) 2
2019 2,302.9 1,396.4 419.6 565.4 319.7 906.5 243.8 188.5 136.8 662.2 1,640.7 887.5 523.8 753.2 257.5 158.0
2020 2,265.0 1,354.9 399.1 543.5 320.0 910.1 228.7 179.5 187.9 636.3 1,628.8 904.7 537.0 724.0 267.3 149.8
2021 2,626.3 1,479.3 441.7 573.9 363.5 1,147.0 254.4 206.3 204.2 764.7 1,861.6 918.5 548.5 943.2 285.9 184.0
2022 2,730.8 1,538.3 461.5 591.7 388.3 1,192.4 307.7 209.1 186.5 879.7 1,851.1 912.7 534.3 938.4 291.2 215.2
2021 H2 2,626.3 1,479.3 441.7 573.9 363.5 1,147.0 254.4 206.3 204.2 764.7 1,861.6 918.5 548.5 943.2 285.9 184.0
2022 H1 2,898.3 1,582.5 462.4 583.8 422.6 1,315.9 303.6 222.5 177.2 830.9 2,067.4 945.2 558.2 1,122.2 272.8 207.6
H2 2,730.8 1,538.3 461.5 591.7 388.3 1,192.4 307.7 209.1 186.5 879.7 1,851.1 912.7 534.3 938.4 291.2 215.2
p 2023 H1 2,651.0 1,504.1 460.3 588.8 348.8 1,146.8 326.4 210.9 183.6 892.6 1,758.4 854.6 532.3 903.8 282.9 210.1
As a percentage of total assets
2019 100.0 60.6 18.2 24.6 13.9 39.4 10.6 8.2 5.9 28.8 71.3 38.5 22.7 32.7 11.2 6.9
2020 100.0 59.8 17.6 24.0 14.1 40.2 10.1 7.9 8.3 28.1 71.9 39.9 23.7 32.0 11.8 6.6
2021 100.0 56.3 16.8 21.9 13.8 43.7 9.7 7.9 7.8 29.1 70.9 35.0 20.9 35.9 10.9 7.0
2022 100.0 56.3 16.9 21.7 14.2 43.7 11.3 7.7 6.8 32.2 67.8 33.4 19.6 34.4 10.7 7.9
2021 H2 100.0 56.3 16.8 21.9 13.8 43.7 9.7 7.9 7.8 29.1 70.9 35.0 20.9 35.9 10.9 7.0
2022 H1 100.0 54.6 16.0 20.1 14.6 45.4 10.5 7.7 6.1 28.7 71.3 32.6 19.3 38.7 9.4 7.2
H2 100.0 56.3 16.9 21.7 14.2 43.7 11.3 7.7 6.8 32.2 67.8 33.4 19.6 34.4 10.7 7.9
p 2023 H1 100.0 56.7 17.4 22.2 13.2 43.3 12.3 8.0 6.9 33.7 66.3 32.2 20.1 34.1 10.7 7.9
Groups with a focus on the services sector (€ billion)  
2019 497.7 373.3 166.7 171.8 13.7 124.4 13.7 49.1 31.6 158.8 338.9 203.8 152.6 135.1 32.3 49.6
2020 585.0 442.4 208.5 189.6 15.1 142.6 14.9 46.4 52.6 175.3 409.7 276.7 209.4 133.0 37.1 46.3
2021 665.7 492.2 238.5 200.0 21.3 173.5 17.7 55.2 57.3 229.7 436.0 288.4 223.6 147.6 35.5 52.6
2022 700.9 518.7 251.9 212.5 21.8 182.2 18.5 59.1 57.8 253.5 447.3 283.0 225.9 164.3 40.7 58.1
2021 H2 665.7 492.2 238.5 200.0 21.3 173.5 17.7 55.2 57.3 229.7 436.0 288.4 223.6 147.6 35.5 52.6
2022 H1 695.3 525.7 256.7 212.5 24.8 169.6 18.8 62.2 48.2 244.5 450.8 291.8 231.4 159.0 40.9 53.1
H2 700.9 518.7 251.9 212.5 21.8 182.2 18.5 59.1 57.8 253.5 447.3 283.0 225.9 164.3 40.7 58.1
p 2023 H1 671.4 505.4 239.2 210.2 24.7 166.0 17.4 52.9 50.7 241.5 429.9 276.2 220.1 153.8 44.6 49.9
As a percentage of total assets
2019 100.0 75.0 33.5 34.5 2.8 25.0 2.8 9.9 6.4 31.9 68.1 41.0 30.7 27.2 6.5 10.0
2020 100.0 75.6 35.6 32.4 2.6 24.4 2.6 7.9 9.0 30.0 70.0 47.3 35.8 22.7 6.3 7.9
2021 100.0 73.9 35.8 30.0 3.2 26.1 2.7 8.3 8.6 34.5 65.5 43.3 33.6 22.2 5.3 7.9
2022 100.0 74.0 36.0 30.3 3.1 26.0 2.6 8.4 8.3 36.2 63.8 40.4 32.2 23.5 5.8 8.3
2021 H2 100.0 73.9 35.8 30.0 3.2 26.1 2.7 8.3 8.6 34.5 65.5 43.3 33.6 22.2 5.3 7.9
2022 H1 100.0 75.6 36.9 30.6 3.6 24.4 2.7 9.0 6.9 35.2 64.8 42.0 33.3 22.9 5.9 7.6
H2 100.0 74.0 36.0 30.3 3.1 26.0 2.6 8.4 8.3 36.2 63.8 40.4 32.2 23.5 5.8 8.3
p 2023 H1 100.0 75.3 35.6 31.3 3.7 24.7 2.6 7.9 7.6 36.0 64.0 41.1 32.8 22.9 6.6 7.4
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Including cash equivalents.  2 Includ-
ing groups in agriculture and forestry.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
74•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-
sation (EBITDA  1 ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Distribution  2 Distribution  2
RevenuesOperating income
before depreciation
and amortisation
(EBITDA  1 )Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartileOperating
income (EBIT)Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartile
Period € billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4€ billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  4% % % € billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  4% % %
Total
2015 1,633.9 6.9 195.9 – 1.1 12.0 – 1.0 6.3 10.6 17.8 91.5 – 16.4 5.6 – 1.5 1.8 6.7 11.3
2016 1,624.3 – 0.4 214.4 7.8 13.2 1.0 6.7 11.4 17.9 111.7 9.0 6.9 0.5 2.6 6.7 12.0
2017 1,719.3 5.1 243.4 14.6 14.2 1.2 7.0 11.0 18.0 141.9 33.3 8.3 1.8 2.5 6.8 12.1
6 2018 1,706.8 0.7 232.8 – 0.9 13.6 – 0.2 6.1 10.6 17.8 129.2 – 6.3 7.6 – 0.6 2.1 6.5 11.9
2019 1,764.6 2.6 233.6 0.4 13.2 – 0.3 6.9 12.2 19.2 105.5 – 17.9 6.0 – 1.5 1.6 5.8 11.8
2020 1,632.8 – 8.8 213.6 – 7.7 13.1 0.2 6.5 11.5 17.9 52.1 – 41.0 3.2 – 2.1 – 0.8 4.9 10.5
2021 1,994.7 20.4 297.7 37.7 14.9 1.9 7.8 13.4 19.9 161.5 212.6 8.1 5.0 2.9 8.2 12.2
2022 2,431.3 20.8 324.8 7.8 13.4 – 1.6 6.4 11.8 18.4 171.0 4.1 7.0 – 1.1 1.6 6.6 12.4
2018 H2 869.4 1.4 114.4 0.5 13.2 – 0.1 6.3 11.2 18.0 58.0 – 7.6 6.7 – 0.6 2.1 6.8 12.5
2019 H1 861.3 2.7 112.3 – 4.0 13.0 – 0.9 6.5 11.8 18.6 53.4 – 23.3 6.2 – 2.1 1.5 5.7 11.7
H2 903.7 2.4 121.3 4.8 13.4 0.3 6.6 11.8 20.0 52.0 – 11.4 5.8 – 0.9 0.8 6.1 12.5
2020 H1 744.5 – 14.4 78.2 – 34.1 10.5 – 3.0 4.8 9.9 16.7 7.9 – 88.0 1.1 – 5.3 – 2.1 3.5 8.8
H2 888.4 – 3.3 135.4 17.1 15.2 2.8 7.6 13.2 19.8 44.2 8.6 5.0 0.7 1.7 6.5 11.6
2021 H1 920.0 20.3 151.5 87.2 16.5 5.9 7.4 12.6 19.5 84.5 . 9.2 8.3 2.3 7.8 12.2
H2 1,075.6 20.4 146.4 8.1 13.6 – 1.6 7.9 13.2 20.8 77.0 73.1 7.2 2.2 2.9 7.7 13.4
2022 H1 1,149.7 23.5 161.0 4.8 14.0 – 2.5 6.1 11.5 18.4 84.9 – 1.6 7.4 – 1.9 1.6 6.4 11.8
H2 1,283.3 18.5 163.9 11.0 12.8 – 0.9 5.9 11.6 18.9 86.2 10.4 6.7 – 0.5 1.7 6.7 12.9
p 2023 H1 1,112.0 – 3.0 172.0 7.4 15.5 1.5 6.4 10.8 17.5 98.1 16.2 8.8 1.5 1.2 6.5 10.8
Groups with a focus on the production sector 5
2015 1,309.7 7.0 149.0 – 2.6 11.4 – 1.1 6.3 10.5 16.3 69.1 – 19.7 5.3 – 1.8 2.2 6.6 10.4
2016 1,295.9 – 0.8 161.9 6.3 12.5 0.8 6.5 10.6 16.0 84.8 4.2 6.5 0.3 2.8 6.3 10.5
2017 1,395.9 5.5 187.5 16.6 13.4 1.3 7.1 11.0 15.8 112.5 40.6 8.1 2.0 3.2 6.7 10.4
6 2018 1,367.7 1.0 175.7 – 1.5 12.9 – 0.3 6.9 10.7 16.0 100.7 – 7.1 7.4 – 0.6 2.8 6.9 11.4
2019 1,410.9 2.0 168.1 – 4.4 11.9 – 0.8 6.9 11.3 16.6 76.3 – 23.8 5.4 – 1.8 1.4 5.7 10.1
2020 1,285.2 – 9.4 143.6 – 8.6 11.2 0.1 5.7 10.6 16.5 29.1 – 48.1 2.3 – 2.3 – 0.7 4.3 9.8
2021 1,585.8 22.4 208.9 45.9 13.2 2.1 7.9 12.8 17.9 118.6 325.8 7.5 5.4 2.8 7.8 11.1
2022 1,957.4 21.7 222.9 4.7 11.4 – 1.8 6.9 11.3 16.4 117.3 – 3.9 6.0 – 1.6 1.8 6.6 10.7
2018 H2 695.4 2.1 83.1 0.7 12.0 – 0.2 6.2 11.1 16.2 42.1 – 8.7 6.1 – 0.7 2.0 6.4 11.4
2019 H1 689.9 2.4 83.3 – 8.8 12.1 – 1.5 7.1 10.9 16.1 41.9 – 26.8 6.1 – 2.4 1.8 6.0 9.5
H2 721.0 1.7 84.8 0.3 11.8 – 0.2 6.1 10.8 16.9 34.4 – 19.7 4.8 – 1.3 0.6 5.2 11.1
2020 H1 580.6 – 16.0 49.0 – 42.4 8.4 – 3.8 4.4 8.8 14.9 0.2 – 101.7 0.0 – 6.2 – 2.1 3.1 7.8
H2 704.6 – 3.0 94.6 25.4 13.4 3.4 7.0 12.1 18.6 28.9 19.6 4.1 1.1 0.3 6.0 10.4
2021 H1 731.9 24.0 111.2 126.9 15.2 6.9 8.2 12.6 18.6 66.7 . 9.1 9.3 2.9 7.9 12.1
H2 854.2 21.1 97.7 3.8 11.4 – 1.9 7.8 12.3 17.5 51.9 80.8 6.1 2.0 2.6 7.0 11.5
2022 H1 923.4 23.8 110.9 – 2.5 12.0 – 3.3 7.7 11.5 16.3 59.0 – 14.2 6.4 – 2.8 2.3 6.4 10.4
H2 1,035.8 19.9 112.2 13.1 10.8 – 0.7 5.9 10.8 16.7 58.4 9.6 5.6 – 0.5 1.3 6.5 11.4
p 2023 H1 894.9 – 2.8 129.0 16.6 14.4 2.4 7.1 11.7 16.3 76.7 30.5 8.6 2.2 2.1 6.7 10.7
Groups with a focus on the services sector
2015 324.1 6.1 46.9 4.0 14.5 – 0.3 5.9 11.1 22.1 22.3 – 3.8 6.9 – 0.7 1.3 6.7 13.9
2016 328.4 1.3 52.5 12.8 16.0 1.6 6.8 13.4 25.1 26.9 24.4 8.2 1.5 2.3 8.2 15.3
2017 323.4 3.5 55.9 8.3 17.3 0.8 6.8 11.5 23.0 29.4 11.4 9.1 0.6 2.1 7.2 15.1
6 2018 339.2 – 0.6 57.1 1.3 16.8 0.3 5.5 10.5 24.7 28.5 – 3.5 8.4 – 0.3 1.4 5.8 16.6
2019 353.7 4.8 65.4 15.2 18.5 1.7 6.9 13.7 24.5 29.2 2.8 8.3 – 0.2 2.4 6.2 16.2
2020 347.6 – 6.1 70.0 – 5.4 20.1 0.1 6.9 13.3 22.1 23.0 – 22.1 6.6 – 1.4 – 1.2 6.5 12.2
2021 408.9 13.0 88.8 21.6 21.7 1.6 7.6 15.0 24.0 42.8 79.7 10.5 3.9 3.0 9.2 15.6
2022 473.9 17.4 101.9 15.3 21.5 – 0.4 5.2 13.1 22.8 53.8 26.4 11.3 0.8 1.0 6.9 14.4
2018 H2 174.0 – 1.3 31.3 – 0.0 18.0 0.2 6.7 11.3 25.6 15.9 – 4.6 9.1 – 0.3 2.2 7.0 17.8
2019 H1 171.4 4.0 29.0 13.1 16.9 1.4 5.7 12.3 24.4 11.6 – 7.5 6.7 – 0.9 0.0 4.9 14.5
H2 182.7 5.5 36.5 16.9 20.0 1.9 7.1 15.1 24.4 17.7 10.9 9.7 0.5 1.8 8.2 16.3
2020 H1 163.9 – 8.1 29.2 – 9.4 17.8 – 0.3 5.6 10.8 21.2 7.7 – 36.4 4.7 – 2.1 – 2.2 4.3 10.9
H2 183.8 – 4.2 40.8 – 2.2 22.2 0.4 8.9 14.7 23.3 15.3 – 12.8 8.3 – 0.9 2.6 7.5 13.3
2021 H1 188.1 7.7 40.3 26.1 21.5 3.1 6.9 12.6 24.5 17.8 119.9 9.5 4.8 0.9 6.9 13.6
H2 221.4 17.9 48.7 18.2 22.0 0.1 9.4 16.5 24.7 25.1 59.1 11.3 3.0 3.8 9.5 17.7
2022 H1 226.3 22.0 50.1 25.3 22.2 0.6 4.6 11.6 20.9 25.9 46.4 11.5 1.9 – 0.5 6.3 13.5
H2 247.6 13.4 51.8 7.0 20.9 – 1.3 5.2 14.1 24.0 27.8 12.1 11.2 – 0.1 2.2 7.5 15.4
p 2023 H1 217.1 – 3.8 43.1 – 13.3 19.8 – 2.2 4.7 9.6 19.2 21.4 – 16.4 9.9 – 1.5 – 2.2 4.2 12.0
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-
cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Earnings before interest, taxes, de-
preciation and amortisation.  2 Quantile data are based on the groups' unweighted re-
turn on sales.  3 Annual figures do not always match the sum of the two half-year fig-ures. See Quality report on consolidated financial statement statistics, p. 3.  4 Adjusted
for substantial changes in the basis of consolidation of large groups and in the
reporting sample. See Quality report on consolidated financial statement statistics,
p. 6. 5 Including groups in agriculture and forestry.  6 From 2018 onwards: significant
changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with previous periods.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
75•
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
€ million
2023
Item 2020 2021 2022 Q1  Q2  Q3 August September October  p
I.Current Account +203,643 +349,732 –79,173 +32,567 +39,876 +102,126 +33,737 +40,779 +30,051
1.Goods
Receipts 2,176,527 2,501,971 2,948,338 739,302 724,232 716,987 233,360 246,193 259,013
Expenditure  1,843,734 2,224,666 3,030,270 690,256 667,695 631,766 206,587 215,054 226,122
Balance +332,793 +277,305 –81,931 +49,046 +56,537 +85,221 +26,773 +31,138 +32,891
2.Services
Receipts 883,923 1,035,941 1,263,669 296,670 321,373 334,378 110,461 112,245 111,932
Expenditure  891,717 928,525 1,113,422 281,263 278,823 287,467 96,564 96,139 99,681
Balance – 7,794 +107,416 +150,247 +15,406 +42,550 +46,911 +13,897 +16,105 +12,250
3.Primary income
Receipts 737,663 880,948 988,093 267,200 317,063 278,740 90,776 99,874 96,250
Expenditure  701,246 756,492 967,620 257,177 342,596 270,884 85,557 93,542 97,946
Balance +36,418 +124,457 +20,473 +10,023 –25,533 + 7,855 + 5,219 + 6,332 – 1,696
4.Secondary income
Receipts 128,895 159,503 165,471 39,715 45,829 38,463 12,061 13,232 12,752
Expenditure  286,669 318,948 333,433 81,624 79,508 76,325 24,212 26,029 26,147
Balance –157,774 –159,445 –167,961 –41,908 –33,679 –37,862 –12,151 –12,797 –13,395
II.Capital account + 4,715 +50,738 +154,861 + 5,062 + 3,843 +12,413 + 4,052 + 6,514 + 2,191
III.Financial account  1 +213,574 +410,360 +69,210 +35,203 +72,366 +87,844 +41,253 +39,401 +31,797
1.Direct investment –172,841 +384,178 +291,655 +34,765 +19,622 –14,410 + 7,611 + 6,961 +17,470
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  –33,195 +332,065 –16,704 +50,038 –98,117 –14,348 + 7,425 –11,631 –47,714
By non-resident units of
the euro area  +139,646 –52,113 –308,359 +15,273 –117,739 + 62 – 186 –18,592 –65,184
2.Portfolio investment +537,369 +307,455 –288,964 –97,446 +70,661 –26,425 – 1,766 –37,703 –12,198
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  +692,274 +782,483 –228,473 +63,545 +205,678 +50,544 +23,694 –13,569 –19,981
Equity and
investment fund shares +326,378 +362,157 –186,068 +27,237 +30,518 –30,314 –19,687 –30,579 –15,008
Short-term
debt securities  +125,603 +118,607 –110,943 –57,604 +88,355 +41,658 +34,862 – 1,228 + 1,994
Long-term
debt securities  +240,293 +301,718 +68,538 +93,912 +86,805 +39,201 + 8,519 +18,238 – 6,967
By non-resident units of 
the euro area  +154,905 +475,028 +60,490 +160,991 +135,017 +76,969 +25,461 +24,134 – 7,783
Equity and
investment fund shares +181,256 +640,342 +34,545 +23,685 +18,435 +15,477 +33,549 – 76 – 5,804
Short-term
debt securities  +116,258 +35,539 –66,432 – 2,500 – 5,702 – 8,706 –13,069 + 1,586 –19,925
Long-term
debt securities  –142,609 –200,853 +92,377 +139,806 +122,284 +70,198 + 4,981 +22,624 +17,947
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options +19,509 +63,710 +72,237 +15,603 – 5,138 +11,852 + 8,876 + 3,807 +23,791
4.Other investment –183,645 –475,355 –23,696 +100,729 –14,653 +119,005 +25,231 +70,209 – 1,033
Eurosystem –212,253 –443,530 +175,031 +167,665 +78,208 +54,114 +16,787 – 2,110 +41,009
General government –15,747 –80,427 –49,550 + 5,929 + 5,738 – 6,370 – 259 – 3,407 –20,673
MFIs  2 +24,491 –130,433 –282,827 – 3,850 –61,820 +56,917 + 648 +50,319 +12,586
Enterprises and households +19,863 +179,034 +133,651 –69,015 –36,779 +14,344 + 8,054 +25,407 –33,954
5.Reserve assets +13,183 +130,371 +17,978 –18,447 + 1,875 – 2,178 + 1,302 – 3,873 + 3,768
IV.Net errors and omissions + 5,216 + 9,890 – 6,478 – 2,426 +28,647 –26,694 + 3,463 – 7,892 – 445
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Increase: + / decrease: -.2 Excluding the Eurosystem.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
76•
XII. External sector
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Current Account Financial account  3
Goods 
Zeit Total Totalof which: 
Supplementary
trade items  1 ServicesPrimary
incomeSecondary
incomeBalance of
capital
account  2 Totalof which: 
Reserve
assetsErrors
and
omissions  4
2008 + 144,954 + 184,160 – 3,947 – 29,122 + 24,063 – 34,147 – 893 + 121,336 + 2,008 – 22,725
2009 + 142,744 + 140,626 – 6,605 – 17,642 + 54,524 – 34,764 – 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 – 11,194
2010 + 147,298 + 160,829 – 6,209 – 25,255 + 51,306 – 39,582 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 – 55,760
2011 + 167,340 + 162,970 – 9,357 – 29,930 + 69,087 – 34,787 + 419 + 120,857 + 2,836 – 46,902
2012 + 195,712 + 199,531 – 11,388 – 30,774 + 65,658 – 38,703 – 413 + 151,417 + 1,297 – 43,882
2013 + 184,352 + 203,802 – 12,523 – 39,321 + 63,284 – 43,413 – 563 + 226,014 + 838 + 42,224
2014 + 211,477 + 219,629 – 14,296 – 25,303 + 58,646 – 41,495 + 3,255 + 230,931 – 2,564 + 16,200
2015 + 259,781 + 248,394 – 15,405 – 18,516 + 69,324 – 39,420 + 265 + 237,733 – 2,213 – 22,313
2016 + 270,200 + 252,409 – 19,921 – 20,987 + 77,258 – 38,480 + 2,451 + 258,906 + 1,686 – 13,744
2017 + 255,964 + 255,077 – 13,613 – 23,994 + 77,046 – 52,165 – 2,653 + 268,306 – 1,269 + 14,996
2018 + 267,609 + 221,983 – 22,985 – 15,806 + 112,389 – 50,958 + 914 + 242,889 + 392 – 25,634
2019 + 283,849 + 219,548 – 32,263 – 13,553 + 128,602 – 50,747 – 3,705 + 200,312 – 544 – 79,832
2020 + 240,239 + 191,031 – 8,907 + 7,418 + 96,014 – 54,224 – 9,120 + 191,481 – 51 – 39,638
2021 + 278,689 + 194,388 + 4,757 + 4,802 + 138,545 – 59,046 – 1,179 + 248,551 + 31,892 – 28,959
2022 + 170,937 + 120,791 + 9,999 – 31,036 + 150,017 – 68,835 – 18,644 + 227,707 + 4,426 + 75,414
2020 Q4 + 76,342 + 55,114 – 2,996 + 7,417 + 32,628 – 18,816 – 4,181 + 84,069 + 848 + 11,908
2021 Q1 + 77,373 + 57,527 + 679 + 5,095 + 32,650 – 17,899 – 834 + 72,025 + 385 – 4,514
Q2 + 67,702 + 48,292 + 868 + 7,141 + 21,166 – 8,897 – 2,336 + 87,467 + 58 + 22,101
Q3 + 65,695 + 49,316 + 145 – 5,830 + 37,736 – 15,527 + 1,985 + 16,702 + 31,199 – 50,977
Q4 + 67,919 + 39,252 + 3,064 – 1,604 + 46,994 – 16,723 + 7 + 72,358 + 250 + 4,432
2022 Q1 + 60,119 + 34,968 + 3,927 + 3,038 + 40,362 – 18,249 – 3,021 + 78,775 + 2,200 + 21,677
Q2 + 31,086 + 27,654 + 7,766 – 5,314 + 22,259 – 13,513 – 4,780 + 67,323 + 597 + 41,017
Q3 + 22,958 + 22,987 – 361 – 22,180 + 39,507 – 17,356 – 5,860 – 30,017 + 784 – 47,115
Q4 + 56,774 + 35,182 – 1,333 – 6,579 + 47,889 – 19,718 – 4,984 + 111,625 + 845 + 59,835
2023 Q1 + 69,937 + 55,177 – 1,396 – 6,692 + 41,057 – 19,605 – 11,325 + 99,813 + 224 + 41,200
Q2 + 58,912 + 55,857 – 983 – 14,337 + 26,742 – 9,349 – 4,047 + 51,855 + 1,096 – 3,011
Q3 + 69,554 + 62,010 – 1,556 – 24,854 + 46,482 – 14,083 – 3,535 + 55,215 – 790 – 10,804
2021 June + 26,471 + 17,139 + 530 + 1,168 + 11,248 – 3,084 – 911 + 34,700 + 98 + 9,140
July + 21,623 + 18,516 – 472 – 1,848 + 10,917 – 5,962 – 487 + 1,156 + 102 – 19,980
Aug. + 18,381 + 12,984 + 897 – 3,024 + 13,086 – 4,665 + 532 + 17,522 + 31,254 – 1,391
Sep. + 25,690 + 17,816 – 280 – 958 + 13,733 – 4,901 + 1,939 – 1,977 – 158 – 29,606
Oct. + 18,128 + 15,135 + 1,038 – 4,720 + 13,280 – 5,567 + 506 + 13,955 + 261 – 4,680
Nov. + 22,113 + 14,414 + 759 + 138 + 13,670 – 6,108 – 1,007 + 33,852 + 963 + 12,746
Dec. + 27,678 + 9,704 + 1,266 + 2,978 + 20,043 – 5,048 + 508 + 24,551 – 974 – 3,634
2022 Jan. + 16,392 + 6,644 + 803 + 1,740 + 14,181 – 6,173 – 417 + 29,438 + 309 + 13,462
Feb. + 23,856 + 15,694 + 1,472 + 2,099 + 11,673 – 5,609 – 1,637 + 48,042 + 1,161 + 25,823
Mar. + 19,871 + 12,630 + 1,653 – 801 + 14,508 – 6,467 – 968 + 1,295 + 730 – 17,608
Apr. + 11,144 + 5,057 + 2,536 – 917 + 12,425 – 5,421 – 1,556 + 19,988 + 83 + 10,400
May + 3,390 + 10,859 + 4,323 – 1,959 – 3,881 – 1,628 – 2,724 + 893 + 161 + 227
June + 16,551 + 11,738 + 906 – 2,438 + 13,715 – 6,464 – 501 + 46,441 + 353 + 30,391
July + 8,854 + 8,855 + 382 – 6,089 + 13,001 – 6,912 – 2,321 – 23,333 – 484 – 29,866
Aug. + 1,581 + 3,017 – 567 – 9,555 + 14,077 – 5,957 – 1,261 + 16,672 + 81 + 16,352
Sep. + 12,523 + 11,116 – 176 – 6,536 + 12,429 – 4,486 – 2,277 – 23,355 + 1,187 – 33,601
Oct. + 9,648 + 7,306 – 34 – 5,287 + 13,076 – 5,447 – 2,212 + 44,969 + 672 + 37,533
Nov. + 20,246 + 15,140 + 731 – 2,077 + 13,661 – 6,479 – 2,129 + 466 + 425 – 17,650
Dec. + 26,881 + 12,736 – 2,030 + 785 + 21,152 – 7,792 – 643 + 66,191 – 252 + 39,953
2023 Jan. + 16,964 + 11,678 + 233 – 1,534 + 12,362 – 5,542 – 4,700 + 12,744 – 341 + 481
Feb. + 22,466 + 18,505 – 163 – 2,175 + 12,175 – 6,039 – 1,789 + 32,485 + 143 + 11,808
Mar. + 30,508 + 24,994 – 1,466 – 2,983 + 16,520 – 8,023 – 4,835 + 54,584 + 423 + 28,911
Apr. + 22,352 + 16,296 + 301 – 3,330 + 14,455 – 5,069 – 640 – 15,278 + 88 – 36,990
May + 8,169 + 15,803 + 281 – 6,134 – 1,421 – 79 – 2,309 + 11,923 + 45 + 6,062
June + 28,392 + 23,757 – 1,566 – 4,874 + 13,709 – 4,200 – 1,099 + 55,210 + 962 + 27,917
July + 18,704 + 19,175 – 2,709 – 8,304 + 13,294 – 5,460 – 4,341 – 20 – 118 – 14,383
Aug. + 22,830 + 20,345 + 1,567 – 10,346 + 17,385 – 4,554 – 686 + 32,989 – 107 + 10,846
Sep. + 28,020 + 22,491 – 414 – 6,205 + 15,803 – 4,069 + 1,492 + 22,245 – 566 – 7,267
Oct. + 19,989 + 21,683 – 596 – 9,469 + 13,987 – 6,213 – 4,019 + 15,584 + 858 – 385
p Nov. + 30,832 + 24,396 – 1,424 – 2,983 + 15,309 – 5,889 – 4,162 + 49,176 + 65 + 22,506
1 For example, warehouse transactions for the account of residents, deductions of
goods returned and deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for
processing.  2 Including net acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets.3 Net lending: + / net borrowing: -.  4 Statistical errors and omissions resulting from the
difference between the balance on the financial account and the balances on the
current account and the capital account.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
77•
XII. External sector
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
€ million
2023
Group of countries/country 
2020 2021 
2022 June July Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov.
All countries  1 Exports 1,206,928 1,379,346 1,594,034 139,293 126,197 123,772 129,629 130,894 139,213
Imports 1,026,502 1,204,050 1,505,434 117,219 108,105 107,814 110,108 112,849 116,828
Balance +180,427 +175,296 +88,600 +22,075 +18,092 +15,958 +19,521 +18,044 +22,385
   I. European countries Exports 824,921 949,744 1,091,554 93,790 84,291 82,409 88,735 88,671 95,583
Imports 682,477 803,687 973,063 76,232 69,863 68,278 71,328 72,969 76,393
Balance +142,444 +146,057 +118,492 +17,557 +14,427 +14,131 +17,407 +15,702 +19,190
      1. EU Member States (27) Exports 635,741 751,322 878,642 75,515 67,386 65,694 71,378 70,669 75,354
Imports 546,655 638,064 737,668 62,781 57,285 55,946 58,708 59,659 62,112
Balance +89,087 +113,259 +140,974 +12,734 +10,101 + 9,748 +12,670 +11,010 +13,242
          Euro area (20)       Exports 445,225 525,992 617,068 53,202 47,822 44,919 49,743 49,504 52,793
          countries Imports 372,855 440,248 506,865 41,677 38,393 37,319 38,602 39,658 40,907
Balance +72,370 +85,744 +110,203 +11,524 + 9,429 + 7,600 +11,141 + 9,847 +11,885
          of which:
               Austria Exports 60,118 72,385 90,270 6,866 6,364 6,330 6,617 6,434 6,813
  Imports 40,454 47,492 58,137 4,793 4,365 4,173 4,447 4,467 4,808
Balance +19,663 +24,893 +32,134 + 2,073 + 1,999 + 2,157 + 2,170 + 1,967 + 2,004
               Belgium and Exports 48,824 58,080 70,933 6,110 5,316 5,500 5,520 5,501 5,663
               Luxembourg Imports 39,584 55,726 67,071 4,973 4,308 5,155 4,672 4,720 4,893
Balance + 9,240 + 2,354 + 3,861 + 1,137 + 1,008 + 345 + 848 + 781 + 769
               France Exports 90,910 102,741 118,168 10,599 9,385 8,393 9,919 9,787 10,334
  Imports 56,364 61,921 69,969 6,190 5,547 5,073 5,724 5,715 6,086
Balance +34,546 +40,820 +48,198 + 4,409 + 3,839 + 3,320 + 4,196 + 4,073 + 4,247
               Italy Exports 60,634 75,526 89,191 7,512 6,909 5,359 7,142 7,119 7,718
  Imports 53,906 65,389 73,177 6,371 6,282 5,095 5,771 6,187 6,198
Balance + 6,728 +10,137 +16,014 + 1,141 + 627 + 264 + 1,372 + 931 + 1,520
               Netherlands Exports 84,579 101,050 112,261 9,730 8,903 8,633 9,116 9,209 9,817
  Imports 87,024 105,113 114,998 9,335 8,451 8,133 8,147 8,401 8,440
Balance – 2,445 – 4,063 – 2,737 + 395 + 452 + 500 + 969 + 809 + 1,377
               Spain  Exports 37,618 43,932 49,935 4,759 4,503 3,719 4,515 4,571 5,042
  Imports 31,281 34,180 37,756 3,297 3,100 2,960 2,928 2,939 3,487
Balance + 6,337 + 9,752 +12,178 + 1,462 + 1,403 + 759 + 1,587 + 1,632 + 1,555
          Other EU Member  Exports 190,517 225,331 261,574 22,314 19,563 20,775 21,635 21,165 22,561
          States  Imports 173,800 197,815 230,803 21,104 18,891 18,627 20,106 20,001 21,204
Balance +16,717 +27,515 +30,772 + 1,209 + 672 + 2,148 + 1,529 + 1,163 + 1,357
      2. Other European Exports 189,180 198,421 212,912 18,274 16,905 16,716 17,357 18,002 20,229
          countries Imports 135,822 165,623 235,395 13,451 12,579 12,333 12,620 13,310 14,281
Balance +53,358 +32,798 –22,483 + 4,824 + 4,327 + 4,383 + 4,737 + 4,692 + 5,947
          of which:
               Switzerland Exports 56,265 60,638 70,611 5,740 5,300 5,403 5,526 5,452 6,094
  Imports 45,556 49,247 55,723 4,578 4,001 4,011 4,466 4,349 5,108
Balance +10,708 +11,391 +14,888 + 1,163 + 1,299 + 1,392 + 1,060 + 1,103 + 986
               United Kingdom Exports 67,086 65,002 73,764 6,817 6,249 5,793 6,483 6,863 8,063
  Imports 35,018 32,245 40,314 3,179 2,908 2,872 3,226 2,811 3,058
Balance +32,068 +32,757 +33,449 + 3,638 + 3,341 + 2,920 + 3,256 + 4,052 + 5,005
   II. Non-European  Exports 380,292 427,430 497,428 45,128 41,501 40,875 40,397 41,730 43,239
       countries Imports 343,270 399,604 531,409 40,887 38,117 39,424 38,642 39,712 40,258
Balance +37,022 +27,827 –33,982 + 4,241 + 3,384 + 1,451 + 1,756 + 2,018 + 2,981
       1. Africa Exports 20,086 23,068 26,462 3,032 2,238 2,316 2,273 2,161 2,274
Imports 18,758 26,241 34,213 2,893 2,234 2,360 2,645 2,801 2,664
Balance + 1,328 – 3,173 – 7,751 + 139 + 4– 43 – 372 – 640 – 390
       2. America Exports 141,375 167,735 210,652 19,181 18,478 18,041 17,983 18,954 19,174
  Imports 94,005 101,525 131,979 10,549 10,573 10,778 10,086 10,819 11,368
Balance +47,370 +66,210 +78,673 + 8,633 + 7,905 + 7,263 + 7,897 + 8,136 + 7,807
           of which:
               United States  Exports 103,476 121,980 156,208 13,870 13,603 13,052 13,228 14,161 14,141
  Imports 67,694 72,316 93,338 7,612 7,548 7,834 7,559 7,879 8,335
Balance +35,782 +49,664 +62,871 + 6,258 + 6,055 + 5,219 + 5,669 + 6,281 + 5,806
       3. Asia Exports 208,146 224,897 246,289 21,709 19,650 19,487 19,255 19,542 20,541
  Imports 226,646 267,604 357,702 27,028 24,768 25,812 25,527 25,676 25,876
Balance –18,500 –42,707 –111,413 – 5,319 – 5,118 – 6,325 – 6,272 – 6,134 – 5,336
           of which:
               Middle East  Exports 25,882 26,090 29,648 2,686 2,513 2,605 2,852 2,779 3,015
  Imports 6,721 7,509 13,304 1,246 1,104 1,361 1,448 1,066 1,005
Balance +19,161 +18,582 +16,344 + 1,440 + 1,409 + 1,244 + 1,404 + 1,713 + 2,011
               Japan  Exports 17,396 18,245 20,511 1,802 1,755 1,567 1,633 1,740 1,669
Imports 21,427 23,477 25,413 2,337 2,011 2,117 2,257 2,181 2,073
Balance – 4,032 – 5,232 – 4,902 – 535 – 256 – 549 – 624 – 442 – 404
               People's Republic  Exports 95,840 103,564 106,762 8,829 8,272 8,224 7,580 7,882 8,545
               of China  2 Imports 117,373 142,964 192,830 13,859 12,366 13,081 12,420 13,269 13,818
Balance –21,533 –39,400 –86,068 – 5,030 – 4,094 – 4,857 – 4,841 – 5,388 – 5,273
               New industrial countries Exports 50,590 55,295 63,344 5,895 4,865 4,755 5,023 4,702 5,125
               and emerging markets  Imports 48,222 55,441 71,012 5,633 5,245 5,125 5,355 5,206 5,169
               of Asia  3 Balance + 2,368 – 146 – 7,668 + 263 – 380 – 370 – 332 – 504 – 43
       4. Oceania and Exports 10,685 11,731 14,024 1,205 1,136 1,031 887 1,073 1,249
           polar regions Imports 3,861 4,233 7,515 416 543 475 384 416 349
Balance + 6,824 + 7,497 + 6,510 + 789 + 594 + 556 + 503 + 657 + 900
* Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, Imports
(c.i.f.) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to
the current position. Euro area incl. Croatia.  1 Including fuel and other supplies forships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region.  2 Excluding Hong Kong.
3 Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea,
Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
78•
XII. External sector
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Services  Primary income
of which: 
Zeit Total Transport Travel  1Financial
servicesCharges for
the use of
intellectual
propertyTelecommuni-
cations-, 
computer and
information
servicesOther
business
servicesGouvernment
goods and
services  2Compensation
of employeesInvestment
incomeOther
primary
income  3
2018 – 15,806 – 2,044 – 44,543 + 10,059 + 17,219 – 7,060 + 723 + 3,322 + 671 +112,410 – 692
2019 – 13,553 + 3,607 – 45,947 + 10,755 + 18,368 – 9,763 – 2,948 + 3,489 + 492 +128,990 – 880
2020 + 7,418 – 5,302 – 14,678 + 10,051 + 17,665 – 7,770 – 4,426 + 3,368 + 3,196 + 94,205 – 1,387
2021 + 4,802 – 6,635 – 24,323 + 8,306 + 32,834 – 8,466 – 9,361 + 3,531 + 2,664 +137,881 – 1,999
2022 – 31,036 – 8,643 – 55,244 + 9,464 + 31,406 – 11,241 – 10,085 + 4,078 + 1,993 +152,926 – 4,902
2022 Q1 + 3,038 – 2,849 – 6,033 + 1,996 + 11,530 – 3,704 – 1,520 + 1,063 + 1,288 + 40,527 – 1,453
Q2 – 5,314 – 187 – 13,125 + 2,270 + 7,307 – 2,182 – 2,722 + 1,062 + 425 + 25,841 – 4,007
Q3 – 22,180 – 3,727 – 22,632 + 2,159 + 5,874 – 3,429 – 3,712 + 1,100 – 82 + 41,295 – 1,705
Q4 – 6,579 – 1,880 – 13,454 + 3,039 + 6,695 – 1,926 – 2,131 + 853 + 362 + 45,264 + 2,263
2023 Q1 – 6,692 – 2,788 – 8,001 + 1,777 + 5,263 – 3,682 – 3,001 + 1,051 + 1,224 + 41,509 – 1,676
Q2 – 14,337 – 1,754 – 14,337 + 2,074 + 4,748 – 2,553 – 4,963 + 776 + 393 + 29,351 – 3,002
Q3 – 24,854 – 2,847 – 23,750 + 2,110 + 4,893 – 3,454 – 4,695 + 815 + 49 + 47,836 – 1,403
2023 Jan. – 1,534 – 637 – 2,326 + 771 + 1,928 – 1,434 – 1,302 + 391 + 449 + 12,557 – 644
Feb. – 2,175 – 1,101 – 2,334 + 542 + 946 – 910 – 398 + 351 + 409 + 12,290 – 524
Mar. – 2,983 – 1,050 – 3,341 + 463 + 2,388 – 1,338 – 1,301 + 309 + 366 + 16,661 – 507
Apr. – 3,330 – 452 – 3,406 + 553 + 2,362 – 1,519 – 1,599 + 227 + 104 + 14,820 – 469
May – 6,134 – 707 – 5,027 + 677 + 1,127 – 1,234 – 1,685 + 220 + 111 – 666 – 867
June – 4,874 – 595 – 5,904 + 843 + 1,259 + 199 – 1,679 + 328 + 178 + 15,197 – 1,666
July – 8,304 – 624 – 6,694 + 624 + 1,031 – 1,588 – 1,762 + 204 – 57 + 13,783 – 433
Aug. – 10,346 – 1,075 – 8,867 + 804 + 789 – 1,111 – 1,753 + 301 – 17 + 17,905 – 503
Sep. – 6,205 – 1,147 – 8,189 + 682 + 3,072 – 755 – 1,180 + 309 + 122 + 16,148 – 467
Oct. – 9,469 – 1,116 – 9,630 + 388 + 2,236 – 1,347 – 746 + 332 + 249 + 14,241 – 503
p Nov. – 2,983 – 771 – 3,790 + 730 + 2,183 – 489 – 1,585 + 207 + 241 + 15,398 – 330
1 Since 2001 the sample results of a household survey have been used on the
expenditure side.  2 Domestic public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on
services, not included elsewhere; including the receipts from foreign military bases.3 Includes, inter alia, taxes on leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU as
well as subsidies received from the EU.
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Secondary income Capital account
General government All sectors excluding general government  2
of which:  of which: 
Zeit Total TotalCurrent
international
cooperation  1Current
taxes on
income, wealth,
etc. TotalPersonal transfers
between
resident and
non-resident
households  3of which: 
Workers’
remittances TotalNon-produced
non-financial
assetsCapital
transfers
2018 – 50,958 – 33,109 – 10,849 + 9,753 – 17,848 .– 5,142 + 914 + 3,349 – 2,435
2019 – 50,747 – 30,251 – 11,473 + 11,591 – 20,496 .– 5,431 – 3,705 – 298 – 3,407
2020 – 54,224 – 36,074 – 13,498 + 10,767 – 18,150 .– 5,908 – 9,120 – 3,418 – 5,702
2021 – 59,046 – 36,974 – 11,303 + 11,888 – 22,072 .– 6,170 – 1,179 – 392 – 787
2022 – 68,835 – 41,923 – 17,878 + 14,041 – 26,913 .– 7,149 – 18,644 – 14,397 – 4,247
2022 Q1 – 18,249 – 10,960 – 3,153 + 2,477 – 7,288 – 1,995 – 1,719 – 3,021 – 2,865 – 156
Q2 – 13,513 – 5,957 – 3,247 + 7,339 – 7,556 .– 1,810 – 4,780 – 3,988 – 792
Q3 – 17,356 – 11,401 – 3,727 + 2,138 – 5,955 .– 1,810 – 5,860 – 4,533 – 1,326
Q4 – 19,718 – 13,604 – 7,751 + 2,086 – 6,113 .– 1,810 – 4,984 – 3,011 – 1,973
2023 Q1 – 19,605 – 10,860 – 3,352 + 2,580 – 8,744 .– 1,731 – 11,325 – 10,563 – 762
Q2 – 9,349 – 3,481 – 1,697 + 7,492 – 5,868 .– 1,691 – 4,047 – 3,083 – 964
Q3 – 14,083 – 8,464 – 2,184 + 2,039 – 5,620 .– 1,691 – 3,535 – 2,265 – 1,270
2023 Jan. – 5,542 – 3,794 – 1,910 + 654 – 1,749 – 604 – 603 – 4,700 – 4,169 – 532
Feb. – 6,039 – 3,879 – 923 + 991 – 2,161 – 564 – 564 – 1,789 – 1,776 – 13
Mar. – 8,023 – 3,188 – 519 + 935 – 4,835 .– 564 – 4,835 – 4,618 – 217
Apr. – 5,069 – 3,264 – 1,060 + 1,070 – 1,806 .– 564 – 640 – 182 – 458
May – 79 + 1,974 – 254 + 5,166 – 2,053 .– 564 – 2,309 – 2,114 – 195
June – 4,200 – 2,191 – 383 + 1,256 – 2,010 .– 564 – 1,099 – 787 – 312
July – 5,460 – 3,498 – 911 + 536 – 1,962 .– 564 – 4,341 – 3,670 – 671
Aug. – 4,554 – 2,818 – 823 + 381 – 1,736 – 565 – 564 – 686 – 434 – 252
Sep. – 4,069 – 2,147 – 451 + 1,122 – 1,922 .– 564 + 1,492 + 1,839 – 347
Oct. – 6,213 – 4,194 – 1,398 + 391 – 2,019 .– 560 – 4,019 – 3,426 – 593
p Nov. – 5,889 – 3,993 – 1,348 + 434 – 1,897 .– 560 – 4,162 – 3,353 – 810
1 Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international
cooperation and other current transfers.  2 Includes insurance premiums and claims(excluding life insurance policies).  3 Transfers between resident and non-resident
households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
79•
XII. External sector
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany (net)
€ million
2023
Item 2020 2021 2022 Q1  Q2  Q3  September October November  p
I.Net domestic investment abroad
 (increase: +) +724,008 +819,754 +328,088 +129,843 +26,252 +45,811 +26,560 +84,778 +68,556
1.Direct investment +134,017 +180,852 +169,006 +27,888 +34,896 +17,651 +22,032 + 9,121 +24,420
Equity +89,898 +121,136 +114,061 +23,029 +23,725 +21,222 +11,472 + 2,200 +11,960
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 +17,533 +59,185 +69,943 +16,481 +14,343 +19,016 + 6,200 + 3,547 + 6,639
Debt instruments +44,119 +59,716 +54,945 + 4,859 +11,172 – 3,571 +10,560 + 6,920 +12,460
2.Portfolio investment +166,417 +174,958 +16,697 +78,923 +49,343 + 4,599 – 2,943 – 1,647 +12,952
Shares  2 +53,110 +46,753 –16,698 + 4,072 – 4,568 – 6,069 – 6,764 – 210 – 226
Investment fund shares  3 +35,932 +116,401 +33,614 +10,899 + 4,737 + 8,982 + 3,555 – 210 + 3,492
Short-term  4
debt securities +10,507 – 107 +12,340 + 7,640 + 2,892 – 710 – 20 + 1,473 + 1,257
Long-term   5
debt securities +66,867 +11,912 –12,559 +56,312 +46,281 + 2,395 + 286 – 2,700 + 8,429
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options  6 +94,579 +60,178 +42,677 +20,246 +11,251 +12,599 + 1,536 + 5,141 – 1,017
4.Other investment  7 +329,046 +371,874 +95,282 + 2,562 –70,335 +11,753 + 6,502 +71,305 +32,135
MFIs  8 – 4,313 +112,903 +59,476 +65,798 –23,037 +20,168 – 1,048 +14,581 – 814
Short-term + 3,683 +99,380 +34,961 +68,459 –18,346 + 2,381 – 8,666 + 7,749 – 3,683
Long-term – 8,021 +13,204 +24,474 – 2,691 – 4,705 +17,766 + 7,612 + 6,826 + 2,909
Enterprises and
households  9 +88,179 +143,700 +46,596 +33,033 +52,932 +16,145 +18,016 +46,521 +31,349
Short-term +44,218 +113,230 +23,769 +28,685 +48,375 +13,065 +16,899 +45,674 +30,220
Long-term +22,325 –13,944 – 7,625 + 594 + 563 + 950 + 409 – 517 + 99
General government + 2,069 – 8,123 –24,958 + 9,444 – 2,659 – 1,719 – 84 – 230 – 187
Short-term + 3,461 – 7,256 –23,451 + 3,286 – 1,897 – 1,571 – 42 – 179 + 170
Long-term – 2,485 – 2,327 – 2,883 + 4,337 – 1,000 – 627 – 43 – 51 – 357
Bundesbank +243,112 +123,394 +14,167 –105,713 –97,571 –22,840 –10,382 +10,434 + 1,788
5.Reserve assets – 51 +31,892 + 4,426 + 224 + 1,096 – 790 – 566 + 858 + 65
II.Net foreign investment in the
reporting country (increase: +) +532,526 +571,203 +100,381 +30,030 –25,603 – 9,404 + 4,315 +69,193 +19,380
1.Direct investment +138,902 +80,483 +43,725 –10,209 +21,404 – 5,333 + 2,735 + 9,156 – 2,015
Equity +45,841 +41,374 +14,811 +13,182 + 3,229 – 1,706 + 809 + 2,026 + 614
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 + 707 + 7,659 + 7,123 + 5,976 – 4,384 + 1,524 + 1,352 + 214 + 695
Debt instruments +93,061 +39,109 +28,914 –23,391 +18,174 – 3,627 + 1,926 + 7,130 – 2,628
2.Portfolio investment +150,014 –28,581 – 7,600 +53,182 +32,870 +58,974 +20,089 –10,111 + 6,131
Shares  2 –17,040 + 2,101 – 4,695 – 4,868 – 5,005 – 1,359 – 1,113 – 2,683 + 1,072
Investment fund shares  3 + 962 – 8,433 – 3,235 + 932 – 1,061 – 1,592 – 793 + 109 – 1,084
Short-term  4
debt securities +84,459 +29,313 –37,218 + 1,551 + 9,964 – 2,040 – 8,524 –16,035 + 3,964
Long-term   5
debt securities +81,632 –51,563 +37,548 +55,568 +28,973 +63,964 +30,519 + 8,500 + 2,178
3.Other investment  7 +243,611 +519,301 +64,255 –12,943 –79,877 –63,045 –18,509 +70,148 +15,263
MFIs  8 +108,426 +161,287 +152,946 +108,354 –33,858 –35,890 –26,743 +36,838 –21,445
Short-term +74,908 +115,265 +160,854 +88,506 –37,871 –50,804 –40,233 +35,590 –22,710
Long-term +33,579 +46,044 – 7,910 +19,847 + 4,015 +14,912 +13,489 + 1,247 + 1,265
Enterprises and
households  9 +32,084 +135,961 + 6,958 + 5,051 +26,516 –24,784 –19,979 +55,006 +33,647
Short-term +14,969 +99,877 – 9,271 – 711 +20,334 –26,261 –19,995 +54,399 +31,139
Long-term +13,511 +12,382 + 8,907 + 4,498 + 4,758 + 112 – 317 + 137 + 2,039
General government – 7,840 – 4,742 – 4,931 + 1,074 + 143 + 2,890 + 2,525 + 2,892 + 49
Short-term – 7,557 – 2,134 – 2,478 + 1,683 + 143 + 3,157 + 2,534 + 2,907 – 135
Long-term – 280 – 2,605 – 2,451 – 609 + 0– 77 – 9– 15 + 184
Bundesbank +110,941 +226,796 –90,717 –127,423 –72,678 – 5,260 +25,688 –24,587 + 3,012
III.Net financial account 
(net lending: +/net borrowing: -) +191,481 +248,551 +227,707 +99,813 +51,855 +55,215 +22,245 +15,584 +49,176
1 Estimated on the basis of the figures on the level of direct investment stocks abroad
and in the Federal Republic of Germany (see Statistical series, direct investment
statistics).  2 Including participation certificates.  3 Including reinvestment of earnings.
4 Short-term: original maturity up to one year.  5 Up to and including 2012 without
accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited.6 Balance of transactions arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as
employee stock options.  7 Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency
and deposits.  8 Excluding Bundesbank.  9 Includes the following sectors: financial
corporations (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financial
corporations, households and non-profit institutions serving households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
80•
XII. External sector
7. External position of the Bundesbank *
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
End of
reporting
period Total TotalGold
and gold
receivablesSpecial
drawing
rightsReserve
position in
the IMFCurrency,
deposits and
securities Totalof which: 
Clearing
accounts
within the
ESCB  1Portfolio
investment  2External
liabilities  3 4Net
external
position  5
6 1999 Jan. 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 – – 9,628 85,688
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 – 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,891
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 – 30,308
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,923
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 – 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,454
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,932
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,003
2013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,921
2016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,723 397,727
2017 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,527 474,318
2018 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 770,519 439,462
2019 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 663,320 497,651
2020 1,429,236 219,127 166,904 14,014 8,143 30,066 1,152,757 1,136,002 57,353 781,339 647,898
2021 1,592,822 261,387 173,821 46,491 8,426 32,649 1,276,150 1,260,673 55,285 1,009,488 583,334
2022 1,617,056 276,488 184,036 48,567 9,480 34,404 1,290,317 1,269,076 50,251 919,441 697,614
2023 1,455,788 292,259 201,335 48,766 8,782 33,376 1,117,978 1,093,371 45,550 779,844 675,943
2021 July 1,319,694 219,775 165,984 14,345 8,104 31,343 1,042,015 1,024,970 57,903 657,905 661,789
Aug. 1,360,722 250,742 165,757 45,091 8,174 31,720 1,053,653 1,037,259 56,327 699,773 660,949
Sep. 1,431,909 246,908 160,943 45,606 8,267 32,092 1,130,558 1,115,126 54,443 746,128 685,781
Oct. 1,388,160 250,340 164,602 45,719 8,449 31,570 1,083,141 1,066,604 54,678 735,595 652,564
Nov. 1,456,861 258,815 170,460 46,375 8,405 33,575 1,142,719 1,127,545 55,327 773,217 683,644
Dec. 1,592,822 261,387 173,821 46,491 8,426 32,649 1,276,150 1,260,673 55,285 1,009,488 583,334
2022 Jan. 1,479,694 261,965 173,362 46,931 8,504 33,168 1,163,561 1,149,868 54,168 807,889 671,805
Feb. 1,491,552 273,726 184,255 46,854 8,711 33,905 1,164,098 1,149,722 53,729 774,786 716,766
Mar. 1,516,744 277,782 187,779 47,375 8,663 33,965 1,184,501 1,169,952 54,462 808,690 708,055
Apr. 1,491,558 288,953 196,274 48,617 8,799 35,263 1,148,681 1,135,400 53,923 790,221 701,337
May 1,505,419 278,174 186,481 48,031 8,681 34,980 1,173,376 1,159,716 53,869 805,179 700,240
June 1,566,099 281,157 187,573 48,712 8,948 35,923 1,232,176 1,216,530 52,767 826,280 739,819
July 1,514,570 280,910 185,950 49,465 9,086 36,409 1,179,431 1,166,155 54,229 810,881 703,689
Aug. 1,590,572 280,160 184,794 49,614 9,300 36,451 1,258,187 1,245,014 52,225 842,576 747,996
Sep. 1,613,008 281,258 184,022 50,287 9,358 37,592 1,281,266 1,266,647 50,483 829,129 783,879
Oct. 1,569,272 274,421 178,101 49,675 9,527 37,119 1,243,873 1,230,005 50,977 811,035 758,237
Nov. 1,577,175 277,458 183,052 49,168 9,315 35,923 1,248,088 1,233,980 51,629 810,314 766,861
Dec. 1,617,056 276,488 184,036 48,567 9,480 34,404 1,290,317 1,269,076 50,251 919,441 697,614
2023 Jan. 1,508,507 281,692 190,062 48,256 9,437 33,938 1,176,042 1,162,354 50,772 793,716 714,791
Feb. 1,455,724 276,016 183,755 48,582 9,480 34,199 1,130,353 1,114,888 49,356 743,006 712,718
Mar. 1,522,539 288,131 196,405 48,039 9,373 34,314 1,184,604 1,170,620 49,804 791,478 731,061
Apr. 1,431,180 285,667 194,679 47,642 9,297 34,049 1,096,324 1,081,284 49,189 726,986 704,194
May 1,435,049 290,368 197,915 48,658 9,379 34,416 1,095,750 1,081,900 48,931 701,467 733,582
June 1,416,292 280,820 188,991 48,618 9,292 33,919 1,087,034 1,068,747 48,438 718,324 697,969
July 1,399,374 282,438 191,458 48,368 9,184 33,429 1,068,875 1,052,218 48,061 689,447 709,927
Aug. 1,406,665 284,364 192,914 48,979 9,218 33,253 1,074,575 1,056,420 47,725 687,342 719,322
Sep. 1,393,337 282,490 190,232 49,647 9,278 33,333 1,064,193 1,048,059 46,654 713,662 679,675
Oct. 1,415,403 295,288 202,630 49,531 9,256 33,871 1,074,627 1,058,985 45,488 688,966 726,437
Nov. 1,414,241 292,718 201,195 48,939 8,958 33,627 1,076,415 1,060,074 45,107 691,309 722,932
Dec. 1,455,788 292,259 201,335 48,766 8,782 33,376 1,117,978 1,093,371 45,550 779,844 675,943
* Assets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to
December 2000 the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revaluations,
at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the basis of
cumulative transaction values. From January 2001 all end-of-month levels are valued at
market prices.  1 Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (acc. to the respective country
designation), since November 2000 also balances with non-euro area central bankswithin the ESCB.  2 Mainly long-term debt securities from issuers within the euro area.
3 Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad.  4 See Deutsche Bundesbank,
Monthly Report, October 2014, p. 22.  5 Difference between External assets and
External liabilities.  6 Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January
1999.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
81•
XII. External sector
8. External positions of enterprises *
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities to non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
End of
reporting
period TotalBalances
with
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
grantedAdvance
payments
effected TotalLoans
from
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
usedAdvance
payments
received
Rest of the world
2019 968,277 227,767 740,510 503,698 236,812 220,465 16,348 1,312,974 167,925 1,145,050 932,555 212,495 136,829 75,666
2020 1,030,962 244,325 786,637 546,252 240,385 213,568 26,816 1,419,220 172,112 1,247,108 1,028,217 218,891 130,165 88,726
2021 1,163,639 256,764 906,875 616,964 289,911 261,752 28,159 1,576,549 215,064 1,361,485 1,105,049 256,436 159,446 96,990
2022 1,232,675 251,857 980,818 661,948 318,870 289,264 29,606 1,607,074 174,307 1,432,767 1,139,934 292,833 189,258 103,576
2023 June 1,330,191 353,858 976,333 665,732 310,602 278,874 31,727 1,640,255 203,806 1,436,449 1,152,362 284,087 176,562 107,525
July 1,325,269 357,212 968,057 667,962 300,095 268,536 31,560 1,626,265 202,796 1,423,469 1,150,603 272,866 165,200 107,666
Aug. 1,312,101 353,215 958,886 667,907 290,980 259,478 31,501 1,630,134 206,965 1,423,169 1,157,253 265,916 157,918 107,998
Sep. 1,341,858 358,536 983,323 681,810 301,513 269,903 31,610 1,617,040 192,423 1,424,617 1,149,887 274,730 168,314 106,416
Oct. 1,395,509 405,220 990,289 681,988 308,302 277,468 30,834 1,681,900 221,614 1,460,286 1,180,866 279,420 172,897 106,522
p Nov. 1,433,058 424,791 1,008,267 691,559 316,708 285,509 31,198 1,704,095 244,825 1,459,270 1,175,377 283,893 176,635 107,258
EU Member States (27 excl. GB)
2019 573,453 176,913 396,539 304,545 91,994 83,227 8,768 841,017 91,513 749,504 663,166 86,337 63,664 22,674
2020 612,885 185,565 427,320 333,594 93,725 80,717 13,008 899,482 97,582 801,899 712,252 89,647 61,761 27,886
2021 660,557 194,046 466,511 358,320 108,191 95,340 12,851 988,142 151,193 836,949 733,188 103,761 74,174 29,587
2022 703,663 192,412 511,251 387,897 123,354 109,914 13,440 991,655 125,880 865,775 750,939 114,836 82,671 32,165
2023 June 807,519 288,895 518,624 392,072 126,552 112,044 14,508 1,015,255 128,117 887,137 768,463 118,675 86,648 32,027
July 807,953 290,841 517,111 396,243 120,869 106,293 14,576 997,716 118,205 879,511 767,757 111,754 79,410 32,344
Aug. 799,774 286,857 512,916 395,782 117,135 102,618 14,517 997,918 122,139 875,779 768,727 107,052 74,940 32,112
Sep. 814,429 289,623 524,805 404,137 120,669 106,068 14,601 1,003,027 130,574 872,452 759,188 113,265 80,760 32,505
Oct. 863,004 331,387 531,617 407,738 123,878 109,443 14,435 1,027,403 132,009 895,394 779,711 115,683 82,927 32,756
p Nov. 887,736 347,018 540,718 413,868 126,851 112,300 14,551 1,021,738 137,442 884,296 766,761 117,535 84,523 33,012
Extra-EU Member States (27 incl. GB)
2019 394,824 50,853 343,971 199,153 144,818 137,238 7,580 471,958 76,412 395,546 269,388 126,157 73,165 52,992
2020 418,077 58,760 359,317 212,658 146,659 132,851 13,808 519,738 74,530 445,208 315,965 129,244 68,404 60,840
2021 503,082 62,718 440,364 258,644 181,720 166,411 15,309 588,407 63,871 524,536 371,861 152,675 85,271 67,403
2022 529,012 59,445 469,567 274,050 195,517 179,351 16,166 615,419 48,427 566,992 388,995 177,997 106,587 71,410
2023 June 522,673 64,963 457,710 273,660 184,050 166,831 17,219 625,000 75,689 549,311 383,899 165,412 89,914 75,498
July 517,316 66,370 450,946 271,720 179,226 162,242 16,984 628,549 84,591 543,958 382,846 161,112 85,790 75,322
Aug. 512,327 66,357 445,970 272,125 173,845 156,860 16,985 632,216 84,826 547,390 388,526 158,864 82,978 75,886
Sep. 527,429 68,912 458,517 277,673 180,844 163,834 17,010 614,013 61,848 552,165 390,699 161,465 87,554 73,911
Oct. 532,505 73,833 458,673 274,249 184,423 168,024 16,399 654,496 89,604 564,892 401,155 163,737 89,970 73,766
p Nov. 545,322 77,773 467,548 277,691 189,857 173,210 16,647 682,357 107,383 574,974 408,616 166,359 92,112 74,246
Euro area (20)
2019 494,383 158,182 336,201 264,821 71,380 63,742 7,638 764,929 71,012 693,917 626,886 67,031 49,802 17,229
2020 526,584 164,691 361,893 288,485 73,408 61,662 11,746 812,136 75,869 736,267 666,749 69,518 47,547 21,971
2021 555,081 172,032 383,050 297,861 85,189 73,511 11,678 904,888 129,783 775,105 693,366 81,739 58,280 23,459
2022 597,491 173,395 424,096 328,761 95,336 83,244 12,092 903,757 105,435 798,322 709,668 88,654 63,579 25,075
2023 June 702,858 272,835 430,023 331,855 98,168 85,070 13,098 924,605 108,954 815,652 725,476 90,176 65,920 24,256
July 705,172 275,142 430,030 335,723 94,306 81,133 13,173 910,691 100,225 810,466 725,283 85,183 60,654 24,529
Aug. 697,670 270,789 426,881 335,841 91,040 77,968 13,072 911,291 103,710 807,580 726,079 81,501 57,115 24,386
Sep. 709,383 271,823 437,560 344,312 93,248 80,095 13,153 910,853 109,897 800,956 714,940 86,016 61,442 24,575
Oct. 758,513 314,118 444,395 348,724 95,671 82,732 12,939 935,092 112,036 823,056 734,987 88,069 63,357 24,712
p Nov. 783,505 330,435 453,069 354,454 98,615 85,540 13,075 924,274 114,638 809,635 720,934 88,701 63,922 24,779
Extra-Euro area (20)
2019 473,894 69,585 404,309 238,877 165,432 156,723 8,709 548,045 . . . 145,464 87,027 58,437
2020 504,378 79,634 424,743 257,766 166,977 151,907 15,070 607,084 96,243 510,840 361,467 149,373 82,618 66,755
2021 608,558 84,732 523,826 319,103 204,723 188,241 16,481 671,661 85,281 586,380 411,683 174,697 101,165 73,532
2022 635,184 . . . 223,535 206,021 17,514 703,317 . . . 204,179 125,679 78,501
2023 June 627,333 . . . 212,434 193,805 18,629 715,649 . . . 193,911 110,642 83,269
July 620,097 . . . 205,789 187,402 18,386 715,574 . . . 187,682 104,546 83,137
Aug. 614,431 . . . 199,939 181,510 18,429 718,843 . . . 184,415 100,803 83,612
Sep. 632,475 . . . 208,265 189,808 18,457 706,187 . . . 188,714 106,872 81,842
Oct. 636,997 . . . . . . 746,808 . . . 191,350 109,541 81,810
p Nov. 649,553 . . . 218,092 199,969 18,123 779,821 . . . 195,192 112,713 82,480
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are shown
in Table 4 of Section IV., “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not beeneliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the figures
shown in Table XII.7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
82•
XII. External sector
9. ECB`s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly
or monthly
averageAustralia
AUDCanada
CADChina
CNYDenmark
DKKJapan
JPYNorway
NOKSweden
SEKSwitzerland
CHFUnited Kingdom
GBPUnited States
USD
2012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.2848
2013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.3281
2014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.1069
2017 1.4732 1.4647 7.6290 7.4386 126.71 9.3270 9.6351 1.1117 0.87667 1.1297
2018 1.5797 1.5294 7.8081 7.4532 130.40 9.5975 10.2583 1.1550 0.88471 1.1810
2019 1.6109 1.4855 7.7355 7.4661 122.01 9.8511 10.5891 1.1124 0.87777 1.1195
2020 1.6549 1.5300 7.8747 7.4542 121.85 10.7228 10.4848 1.0705 0.88970 1.1422
2021 1.5749 1.4826 7.6282 7.4370 129.88 10.1633 10.1465 1.0811 0.85960 1.1827
2022 1.5167 1.3695 7.0788 7.4396 138.03 10.1026 10.6296 1.0047 0.85276 1.0530
2023 1.6288 1.4595 7.6600 7.4509 151.99 11.4248 11.4788 0.9718 0.86979 1.0813
2022 Aug. 1.4550 1.3078 6.8884 7.4393 136.85 9.8309 10.5021 0.9690 0.84499 1.0128
Sep. 1.4820 1.3187 6.9508 7.4366 141.57 10.1697 10.7840 0.9640 0.87463 0.9904
Oct. 1.5474 1.3477 7.0687 7.4389 144.73 10.3919 10.9503 0.9791 0.87058 0.9826
Nov. 1.5455 1.3708 7.3171 7.4387 145.12 10.3357 10.8798 0.9842 0.86892 1.0201
Dec. 1.5685 1.4379 7.3859 7.4377 142.82 10.4480 10.9859 0.9865 0.86950 1.0589
2023 Jan. 1.5523 1.4474 7.3173 7.4383 140.54 10.7149 11.2051 0.9961 0.88212 1.0769
Feb. 1.5514 1.4400 7.3244 7.4447 142.38 10.9529 11.1725 0.9905 0.88550 1.0715
Mar. 1.6034 1.4649 7.3807 7.4456 143.01 11.2858 11.2276 0.9908 0.88192 1.0706
Apr. 1.6389 1.4792 7.5561 7.4518 146.51 11.5187 11.3370 0.9846 0.88115 1.0968
May 1.6346 1.4687 7.5948 7.4485 148.93 11.7330 11.3697 0.9751 0.87041 1.0868
June 1.6157 1.4414 7.7653 7.4492 153.15 11.7164 11.6766 0.9764 0.85861 1.0840
July 1.6423 1.4618 7.9482 7.4508 155.94 11.3474 11.6343 0.9663 0.85856 1.1058
Aug. 1.6818 1.4703 7.9096 7.4522 157.96 11.4127 11.8117 0.9588 0.85892 1.0909
Sep. 1.6622 1.4458 7.7967 7.4566 157.80 11.4525 11.8417 0.9600 0.86158 1.0684
Oct. 1.6637 1.4474 7.7200 7.4604 158.04 11.6284 11.6472 0.9547 0.86798 1.0563
Nov. 1.6634 1.4828 7.8087 7.4581 161.84 11.7958 11.5475 0.9634 0.87045 1.0808
Dec. 1.6321 1.4653 7.7870 7.4556 157.21 11.5333 11.2028 0.9441 0.86168 1.0903
* Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference
rates, see Statistical Series Exchange rate statistics.
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units … 
1999 January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603    
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399    
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573  
France French franc FRF 6.55957  
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583  
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27        
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399    
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371  
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482      
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386      
2001 January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750      
2007 January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640      
2008 January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009 January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260    
2011 January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466    
2014 January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015 January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280  
2023 January 1 Croatia Croatian kuna HRK 7.53450  

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2024
83•
XII. External sector
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness *
Q1 1999 = 100
Effective exchange rates of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the  Indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness
extended EER group of trading partners  1broad EER group of
trading partners  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 vis-à-vis Based on consumer price indices vis-à-vis 
27 selected industrial countries  4
of which:
Period NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indicesIn real terms
based on
the deflators
of gross
domestic
product  3In real terms
based on
unit labour
costs of
national
economy  3 NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indices TotalEuro area
countriesNon-
euro area
countries 37 countries  527 selected
industrial
countries  437 countries  560 countries  6
1999 96.2 96.1 95.8 96.1 96.5 95.9 97.9 99.6 95.7 97.7 98.3 98.1 97.8
2000 87.0 86.8 85.9 85.6 88.0 86.1 92.0 97.5 85.5 91.1 93.1 92.3 91.2
2001 87.4 87.1 86.6 84.5 90.1 86.9 91.7 96.6 86.1 90.5 93.0 91.7 91.0
2002 89.7 90.3 89.8 88.2 94.4 90.6 92.3 95.7 88.4 91.0 93.5 92.2 91.9
2003 100.5 101.6 101.1 99.4 106.5 101.7 95.9 94.8 97.5 95.3 97.0 96.7 96.8
2004 104.3 105.6 104.3 102.8 111.0 105.6 96.2 93.6 100.0 95.6 98.5 98.2 98.4
2005 102.9 104.3 102.3 101.0 109.1 103.2 94.8 92.1 98.8 93.3 98.5 97.2 96.7
2006 102.9 104.3 101.8 100.0 109.3 102.6 93.6 90.4 98.2 91.6 98.6 96.8 96.0
2007 106.5 107.3 104.1 101.8 112.9 104.8 94.6 89.7 102.1 92.1 100.9 98.3 97.4
2008 110.4 110.3 106.3 105.7 117.8 107.3 95.0 88.4 105.3 91.4 102.4 98.5 97.6
2009 111.9 111.1 107.4 109.3 120.8 108.3 95.3 89.2 104.8 92.1 101.9 98.6 97.9
2010 104.6 103.3 99.1 101.8 112.1 99.3 92.5 88.7 98.3 88.2 98.8 94.3 92.5
2011 104.4 102.4 97.2 100.0 112.9 98.8 92.2 88.4 97.7 87.4 98.2 93.5 91.9
2012 98.6 97.0 91.6 94.1 107.6 94.0 90.1 88.3 92.6 84.8 95.9 90.5 88.9
2013 102.2 100.1 94.7 97.1 112.4 97.0 92.4 88.8 97.6 86.7 98.1 92.3 90.9
2014 102.4 99.5 94.7 97.3 114.7 97.4 93.0 89.6 98.0 87.4 98.2 92.5 91.5
2015 92.5 89.7 86.0 86.6 106.1 88.7 89.8 90.2 89.2 83.6 94.3 87.8 86.9
2016 95.2 91.6 88.3 p 87.8 110.1 90.7 90.7 90.7 90.7 85.0 95.0 88.8 88.1
2017 97.5 93.6 89.5 p 88.6 112.5 92.0 92.0 90.8 93.6 85.8 96.3 89.9 88.9
2018 100.0 95.8 91.1 p 90.2 117.3 95.2 93.3 91.0 96.7 86.8 97.7 91.2 90.8
2019 98.1 93.3 89.3 p 87.6 115.5 92.5 92.3 91.2 93.9 85.9 96.4 89.9 89.4
2020 99.7 93.7 90.1 p 88.8 119.2 93.9 92.6 91.5 94.0 86.6 96.4 90.1 90.1
2021 99.6 93.7 p 89.4 p 86.9 120.5 94.3 93.6 91.9 96.1 86.9 97.4 90.6 90.9
2022 95.3 90.8 p 84.4 p 82.2 116.1 p 90.9 92.3 91.7 93.0 85.3 95.9 89.1 p 89.0
2023 98.1 p 94.0 ... ... 121.8 p 94.7 … … … … p98.0 p 91.3 p 91.6
2021 July 99.8 93.8 120.6 94.3 97.8 91.0 91.2
Aug. 99.4 93.4 p 89.2 p 86.7 120.2 93.9 93.8 92.0 96.3 87.0 97.4 90.7 90.8
Sep. 99.5 93.6 120.1 93.9 97.3 90.6 90.6
Oct. 98.5 92.7 119.2 93.2 96.7 90.0 90.1
Nov. 97.6 91.9 p 87.4 p 84.8 118.4 92.6 93.6 92.4 95.2 86.5 96.2 89.4 89.7
Dec. 97.0 91.4 118.6 92.4 95.7 88.9 89.3
2022 Jan. 96.6 91.4 118.2 p 92.3 96.0 88.9 p 89.3
Feb. 96.8 91.8 p 85.8 p 83.5 118.5 p 92.6 93.0 92.0 94.4 85.8 96.1 89.0 p 89.4
Mar. 95.8 91.5 117.9 p 92.6 96.3 89.5 p 89.9
Apr. 95.0 90.1 116.0 p 90.3 96.1 88.9 p 88.8
May 95.4 90.5 p 84.2 p 81.9 115.8 p 90.1 92.3 91.6 93.2 85.0 96.5 89.5 p 89.2
June 95.7 90.7 116.1 p 90.3 95.7 88.7 p 88.4
July 93.9 89.2 114.1 p 88.9 94.9 87.9 p 87.5
Aug. 93.4 88.9 p 82.5 p 80.6 113.6 p 88.7 91.6 91.6 91.2 84.6 94.5 87.6 p 87.3
Sep. 93.9 89.9 113.9 p 89.4 95.9 89.1 p 88.7
Oct. 94.5 91.3 114.8 p 90.8 96.0 89.7 p 89.4
Nov. 95.7 92.3 p 85.0 p 82.9 116.6 p 92.0 92.4 91.8 93.1 85.7 97.0 90.6 p 90.4
Dec. 96.8 92.6 118.6 p 92.8 96.1 89.7 p 89.7
2023 Jan. 97.1 92.8 119.2 p 93.1 97.4 90.3 p 90.4
Feb. 97.0 93.0 p 86.8 p 84.8 119.3 p 93.4 93.2 91.6 95.4 86.2 97.6 90.5 p 90.6
Mar. 97.3 93.2 119.7 p 93.6 98.0 91.0 p 91.1
Apr. 98.4 94.1 121.5 p 94.8 98.5 91.6 p 91.9
May 98.0 93.5 p 88.0 p 85.2 120.9 p 94.1 93.9 92.1 96.5 87.1 98.0 91.0 p 91.3
June 98.2 93.8 121.8 p 94.7 98.3 91.4 p 91.9
July 99.2 95.0 123.7 p 96.2 98.4 91.9 p 92.5
Aug. 99.0 95.0 p 88.6 p 86.7 123.7 p 96.1 93.8 92.0 96.4 87.5 98.3 91.9 p 92.4
Sep. 98.5 94.6 123.0 p 95.5 98.1 91.8 p 92.2
Oct. 98.0 p 94.1 122.5 p 95.0 97.7 p 91.3 p 91.7
Nov. 98.7 p 94.6 ... ... 123.4 p 95.3 … … … … 98.1 p 91.5 p 91.9
Dec. 98.2 p 94.0 123.2 p 94.9 p97.6 p 91.0 p 91.5
* The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the curren-
cy concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German economy's price
competitiveness is consistent with the procedure to compute the effective exchange
rates of the euro. A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. The
weights are based on trade in manufactured goods and services. For more detailed in-
formation on methodology and weighting scale, see the website of the Deutsche
Bundesbank (https://www.bundesbank.de/content/796162).  1 The calculations are
based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral exchange rates of the
euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the following 18 countries: Australia, Bulgaria, Canada,
China, Czechia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Norway, Poland, Romania,
Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United
States. Where current price and wage indices were not available, estimates were used.
2 Includes countries belonging to the extended EER group of trading partners (fixed
composition) and additionally the following 23 countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil,
Chile, Colombia, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zea-
land, Peru, Philippines, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Taiwan,Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine and United Arab Emirates. The ECB has suspended the
publication and calculation of the euro foreign exchange reference rate against Russian
rouble with effect from March 2, 2022 until further notice. For the calculation of
effective exchange rates, an indicative rate is used for the Russian Federation from that
date. It is calculated from the daily RUB/USD rates determined by the Bank of Russia in
conjunction with the respective ECB's euro foreign exchange reference rate to the US
dollar.  3 Annual and quarterly averages.  4 Euro area countries (from 2001 including
Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta, from
2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including Latvia, from
2015 including Lithuania, from 2023 including Croatia) as well as Canada, Denmark,
Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.
5 Euro area countries (current composition) and countries belonging to the extended
EER group of trading partners (fixed comosition).  6 Euro area countries (current compo-
sition) and countries belonging to the broad EER group of trading partners (fixed
composition).

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
84•

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The printed publications are available free of charge to interested parties and may be 
obtained through the Bundesbank’s order portal. Up-to-date figures for selected statistical 
datasets are available on the Bundesbank’s website, as are also the Statistical Series, with a 
changed basic structure and advanced options for using data.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
A list of the articles published in the period from 
2010 to 2022 is available on the Bundesbank’s 
website.
Monthly Report articles
March 2023
– German balance of payments in 2022
– The impact of digitalisation on labour prod -
uctivity growth
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2021
April 2023
– Money market conditions and remuneration 
of government  deposits
– Household wealth and finances in  Germany: 
Results of the 2021 household wealth survey
– Turning point in payments
– Sustainability risks in banking supervisionMay 2023
– The current economic situation in Germany
June 2023
– Arduous recovery amid high and only grad -
ually easing inflation – outlook for the Ger -
man economy up to 2025
– Developments in bank interest rates in Ger -
many during the period of monetary policy 
tightening
– The growing significance of central govern -
ment’s off-budget entities
July 2023
– Digital money: options for the financial in -
dustry
– Cross- border liquidity flows – the role of the 
banking system in the German balance of 
payments
– Economic developments in emerging market 
economies: old problems and new chal -
lenges
August 2023
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2023
– Germany as a business location: selected as -
pects of current dependencies and medium- 
term challengesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
85•

– Heterogeneous impact of monetary policy in 
the euro area?
– Models for short- term economic fore casting 
during the recent crises
– Member States’ financial relationships with 
the EU budget and the NextGenerationEU 
off- budget entity in 2022
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2022
October 2023
– Is price competitiveness favourable in Ger -
many and the euro area?
– State government finances in 2022: high sur -
plus overall, some states still making exten -
sive recourse to emergency borrowing
November 2023
– The current economic situation in Germany
December 2023
– Falling inflation, but not yet time to sound 
the all- clear – outlook for the German econ -
omy up to 2026
– Model- based recommendations for monet -
ary policy decision- making
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing during the 2022  energy crisis
– Tackling the challenges of crypto-assets – the 
state of play with regulation
January 2024
– Risks facing Germany as a result of its eco -
nomic ties with China
– The outlook for cash – a systematic look at 
the future of cashStatistical Series*
Banks
– Banking statistics, monthly
– Statistics on payments and securities trading, 
September
Corporate financial statements
– Consolidated financial statement statistics, 
June/ December
– Financial statement statistics (extrapolated 
results), December
– Financial statement statistics (ratios), May
– Financial statement statistics (ratios – provi -
sional data), May
Economic activity and prices
– Seasonally adjusted business statistics, 
monthly
Exchange rates
– Exchange rate statistics, monthly
External sector
– Balance of payments statistics, monthly
– Direct investment statistics, April
– International investment position and exter -
nal debt, monthly
Macroeconomic accounting systems
– Financial accounts, June
Money and capital markets
– Capital market indicators, monthly
– Investment funds statistics, monthly
– Securities issues statistics, monthly
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines, July 20231,2
2 Banking statistics, customer classification, 
July 20232
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
86•

3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen , July 
20131,2
7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 2013
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 1
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
19971
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 19991
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:  
MEMMOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik -
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 20051
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20061
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich  von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
20131
Discussion Paperso
20/ 2023  
Forecasting banknote circulation during the 
COVID-19 pandemic using structural time series 
models21/2023  
Effects of the ECB’s communication on govern -
ment bond spreads
22/2023  
Learning monetary policy strategies at the ef -
fective lower bound with sudden surprises
23/ 2023  
Capital reallocation under climate policy uncer -
tainty
24/ 2023  
Towards seasonal adjustment of infra- monthly 
time series with JDemetra+
25/ 2023  
Precision- based sampling for state space models 
that have no measurement error
26/2023  
Effects of bank capital requirements on lending 
by banks and non-bank financial institutions
27/2023  
Forceful or persistent: How the ECB’s new infla -
tion target affects households’ inflation expect -
ations
28/2023  
Energy prices and inflation expectations: Evi -
dence from households and firms
29/2023  
Effects of mergers on network models of the 
finan cial system
30/2023  
Staggered difference-in-differences in gravity 
settings: Revisiting the effects of trade agree -
ments
31/2023  
Collateral scarcity and market functioning: In -
sights from the Eurosystem securities lending 
facilities
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
87•

32/2023  
The macroeconomic effects of inflation uncer -
tainty
33/2023  
The role of emission disclosure for the 
low-carbon transition
34/2023  
Nowcasting consumer price inflation using 
high-frequency scanner data: Evidence from 
Germany
01/ 2024  
On household labour supply in sticky- wage 
HANK models
02/ 2024  
Back to the roots of internal credit risk models: 
Does risk explain why banks‘ risk- weighted 
asset levels converge over time?Banking legislation
 1 Bundesbank Act, July 2013, and Statute of 
the European System of Central Banks and 
of the European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, 
January  20081
 2a Solvency Regulation and Liquidity Regula -
tion, February 20082
* The Statistical Series replace the Statistical Supplements 
and, in part, the Special Statistical Publications; they will be 
provided exclusively on the Bundesbank’s website under 
Publications/ Statistics.
o Discussion papers published from 2000 are available on -
line.
1 Publication available in German only.
2 Available only as a download.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
January 2024  
88•

