Monthly Report – 
June 2024
Vol. 76 No 6

Table of Content
Commentary: Economic conditions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
1 Germany’s economic recovery is continuing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
2 Industry is slowly working its way past its bout of weakness  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
3 Private consumption is expected to pick up somewhat  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
4 Labour market largely unchanged  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
5 Energy prices mixed of late  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
6 Inflation rate up again in May  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
List of references  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing 
– outlook up to 2026  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
1. Macroeconomic outlook  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
Underlying conditions for the Forecast for Germany  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
2 Outlook for public finances  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  43
3 Risk assessment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  46
List of references  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  51
An international comparison of the tax wedge on labour: the 
difference between pension contributions and taxes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  53
1 Article overview  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  55
2 An international comparison of tax wedges on labour  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  56
3 Social security contributions with a retirement savings component differ 
from wage taxes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  61
4 Tax component of the total tax wedge: an approximation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  63
5 Concluding remarks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  71
Methodological information on tax wedge adjustment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  73

3Commentary: Economic 
conditions

Commentary: Economic conditions
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 41 Germany’s economic recovery is continuing 
The economic recovery in Germany is continuing.  Real  is expected to rise again GDP
slightly in the second quarter. While the German economy still faces headwinds, more 
bright spots are emerging. Industrial output increased in April, for example, and new 
orders are gradually stabilising. Foreign demand, in particular, shows signs of 
improvement – albeit starting from a low level. Higher financing costs continue to 
dampen domestic demand, particularly investment activity. This is largely putting a 
burden on housing construction. Construction output fell back down significantly in 
April, having been boosted by exceptionally mild weather in the first quarter. By 
contrast, the rebound in the services sector looks set to continue, as indicated by the 
results of S&P Global’s survey of purchasing managers. Moreover, the upturn in the 
services sector could be increasingly supported by private consumption. While private 
consumption was still subdued in the first quarter, it is likely to go up somewhat in the 
second quarter. Consumers were still holding back on additional spending at the 
beginning of the second quarter but their spending leeway is currently improving, 
mainly thanks to a steep rise in wages. And consumer sentiment has brightened 
significantly of late. Survey indicators also indicate a recovery in overall economic 
activity. According to the  Institute’s business climate index, taking the average of ifo
April and May, the business situation was significantly better than in the first quarter, 
while business expectations for the next six months improved markedly.   1) 
1 For further information on the outlook for the German economy, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2024).

Commentary: Economic conditions
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 5


Commentary: Economic conditions
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 62 Industry is slowly working its way past its bout of 
weakness
Industry is slowly making progress in working past its bout of weakness.  Industrial 
output has been on a generally upward trajectory since the start of the year. After 
seasonal adjustment,  it increased slightly in April as well and was somewhat higher 
than in the first quarter. Output growth was not broad-based, however, but was mainly 
driven by the automotive industry.  Output in energy-intensive sectors, which had 
increased since the beginning of the year, was also slightly up on the quarter in April, 
despite edging back down month on month. The short-term outlook is still subdued 
overall. According to data from the German Association of the Automotive Industry, the 
number of passenger cars manufactured went down fairly significantly again in May. 
Demand for industrial products remains weak generally, but there are increasing signs 
of improvement. Though there have been few large orders of late, industrial new 
orders excluding volatile large orders rose significantly in April – on both the month and 
the quarter. Although the automotive industry was also a key pillar here, the increase in 
new orders is likely to have been more broad-based than that of industrial output. 
The underlying trend for industrial demand improved due to demand from abroad, 
especially.  Investment and consumer goods, in particular, attracted increased demand 
from euro area countries. In addition, real exports of goods in April were up on the 
month and also higher than in the first quarter of 2024. Overall, this corroborates the 
signals observed in previous months that there would be a gradual increase in 
demand – especially from abroad. A further improvement would also be consistent with 
 business and export expectations in the manufacturing sector, which have been ifo
brightening since the turn of the year. 2) 
 3) 
2 Seasonal adjustment here and in the remainder of this text also includes adjustment for calendar variations, 
provided they can be verified and quantified.
3 Excluding the manufacture of motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts, industrial output declined.

Commentary: Economic conditions
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 7


Commentary: Economic conditions
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 83 Private consumption is expected to pick up somewhat
Private consumption is expected to pick up somewhat in the current quarter. 
Consumers remained reluctant to spend in some respects. Averaged across April and 
May, motor vehicle registrations by private owners were down on the first quarter, 
according to data provided by the German Association of the Automotive Industry.  
Price-adjusted sales in the hotel and restaurant sector in April were likewise slightly 
down on the previous quarter’s level. However, there were signs of an upturn in the 
retail sector, where price and seasonally adjusted sales in April were up significantly on 
the previous quarter’s level. The private consumption survey indicators available for the 
second quarter also indicate a gradual improvement. The GfK consumer climate index 
continued its recovery in April and May. In May, in particular, consumers’ economic 
prospects improved significantly on the back of a moderate rise in their income 
expectations and a marked decline in their propensity to save. However, their 
propensity to purchase barely improved. The  business climate index for enterprises ifo
in consumer-related services sectors continued to grow in April and May from a low 
level. Assessments of the current situation and expectations for the next six months 
improved in the retail sector. Overall, therefore, the indicators suggest a positive trend 
in private consumption over the remainder of the second quarter. 4) 
4 The registration figures for new electric vehicles, in particular, have been very low since the sharp decline at 
the turn of the year. The end of the environmental bonus for private electric vehicles led to anticipatory effects 
in December 2023 and a sharp drop in the number of electric car registrations in January.

Commentary: Economic conditions
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 94 Labour market largely unchanged
There was little change in the labour market during the period under review. 
Employment expanded at a low rate. Seasonally adjusted figures show that, in April, 
25,000 more people were in employment than a month earlier. In March, total 
employment had grown by only a very small amount. According to the Federal 
Employment Agency’s first extrapolation, this was due to the weak growth of 
employment subject to social security contributions, which largely stagnated. Weak 
cyclical demand for labour was particularly evident in temporary agency employment, 
but also in the manufacturing and construction sectors, and jobs were cut. Looking at 
the economy as a whole, this was offset by additional jobs in some services sectors, 
most notably in healthcare and long-term care. That not more jobs were lost in the 
manufacturing sector was due to the continued moderate rise in short-time work. In 
March, almost 220,000 employees subject to social security contributions were on short-
time work for economic reasons, the vast majority of them in the manufacturing sector 
according to the sectoral breakdown, which is available up to February. 

Commentary: Economic conditions
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 10This situation is unlikely to change much over the next few months. As employment 
remained surprisingly strong over the past two years of economic weakness, the need 
to recruit new staff should not initially be particularly pronounced in the event of a 
cyclical recovery. This is also suggested by the leading indicators of employment 
developments. During the period under review, they were barely changed in neutral 
territory. There was some recovery in the average hours worked by employed persons 
in the first quarter of 2024. But cyclical reasons were less of a factor here than the clear 
reduction in the sickness rate, which had been enormously high in the fourth quarter of 
2023. 
Unemployment continued to rise perceptibly in May.  As at the cut-off date, the 
Federal Employment Agency recorded around 25,000 more persons as unemployed 
than in April, giving a seasonally adjusted total of 2.76 million persons. The 
 5) 

Commentary: Economic conditions
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 11unemployment rate held steady at 5.9 %.  Unemployment was up by 179,000 persons 
on the year. Meanwhile, total underemployment, which includes persons in labour 
market policy measures, only increased by around 134,000. This means that around 
one-quarter of the increase in unemployment over the past 12 months can be 
explained by the decline in the number of participants in labour market policy 
measures as well as language and integration courses. The expectation that had 
emerged in recent months that rising unemployment would end soon suffered a 
setback with the latest  barometer. The barometer fell further into negative territory IAB
again in May.  5) 
5 Despite the higher number of unemployed, the unemployment rate did not rise as the number of active 
workers also increased – partly owing to high immigration. The Federal Employment Agency adjusts this 
figure, which is used to calculate the unemployment rate, only once a year – usually in May – and in doing so 
catches up on the developments of the past 12 months.

Commentary: Economic conditions
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 125 Energy prices mixed of late
Energy price developments were mixed in the reporting period.  Crude oil prices 
declined somewhat in trend terms in recent weeks. As this report went to press, a 
barrel of Brent crude oil cost US$85, just over 5 % less than in April. This was likely due 
mainly to somewhat reduced tensions in the Middle East of late and the decision by 
 and its partners to reverse some of their previous production cuts in the future. OPEC
At the same time, European gas prices rose markedly. A number of unexpected 
maintenance-related production outages, concerns about Russian gas supplies to 
Europe and strong Asian demand for liquefied gas drove prices up.

Commentary: Economic conditions
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 136 Inflation rate up again in May
At the upstream stages of the economy, prices excluding energy rose again slightly 
in the reporting period.  Domestic producer prices for energy remained more or less 
constant in April compared with the previous month. However, import prices for energy 
rose significantly again, in line with commodity prices, which had risen in the 
meantime. The recently very weak price dynamics at the upstream stages of the 
economy therefore appear to be slowly picking back up somewhat, especially in 
imports. Nevertheless, prices at the upstream stages of the economy were still lower 
than in the previous year, by just over 3 % for industrial products and by slightly less 
than 2 % for imports.
A base effect meant the inflation rate increased markedly in May.  By contrast, 
consumer price dynamics slowed somewhat in month-on-month terms. The 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices  rose by 0.2 % on the month in seasonally ( ) HICP
adjusted terms, after +0.4 % in April. Declining prices for energy, processed food and 
non-energy industrial goods had a dampening effect. By comparison, the dynamics of 
unprocessed food and services prices were extremely strong. In terms of services, 
sharply higher prices for package holidays had a particularly pronounced impact. 
Looking at the year-on-year figure, inflation picked up again, from 2.4 % in April to 2.8 % 
in May. Much of this increase is attributable to a base effect in local public transport. In 
May 2023, average prices came down significantly as a result of the introduction of the 
Deutschlandticket, a nationwide flat-rate monthly travel pass. This dampening effect on 
the annual rate is now no longer felt. The core inflation rate (i.e. excluding energy and 
food) consequently rose robustly in May from 2.9 % to 3.5 %. The core rate is thus still 
well above the headline rate and above the long-term average for the years 1999 to 
2023 (1.4 %).

Commentary: Economic conditions
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 14The inflation rate is likely to fluctuate sideways in the coming months.  This can be 
explained mainly by the volatility of energy prices last year. Base effects are likely to 
contribute to a small decline in the inflation rate up until September, followed by an 
increase up until the end of the year. By contrast, core inflation should gradually come 
down slightly, although the disinflation process is likely progressing somewhat more 
slowly than expected, most notably because of unexpectedly strong wage growth.
 6) 
6 For more on the inflation outlook, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2024).

Commentary: Economic conditions
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 15List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024), Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly 
regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026, Monthly Report, June 2024.

16Forecast for Germany: 
German economy slowly 
regaining its footing – 
outlook up to 2026

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 17The German economy is slowly regaining its footing after a roughly two-year period of 
weakness. The services sector has already seen the beginning of an upturn, which will 
probably intensify sooner rather than later as private consumption gradually picks up 
again. Starting from the second half of the year, industry is also likely to expand once 
export business improves again. The economic recovery will be driven by consumption 
and exports as of 2025 as well. Households are benefiting from strong wage growth, a 
gradual decline in inflation and the stable labour market. Rising foreign demand is 
bolstering the export industry. Private investment continues to decline initially, 
providing perceptible growth stimulus only as of 2026. The German economy therefore 
grows again somewhat in the current year before expanding more strongly in the years 
after that. Calendar-adjusted real  increases by 0.3 % in 2024, 1.1 % in 2025 and GDP
1.4 % in 2026. This is broadly in line with the last Forecast for Germany, published in 
December 2023.
Although the inflation rate in Germany continues to recede, it remains persistently 
high. As measured by the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices ( ), it looks set to HICP
fall from last year's 6.0 % to 2.8 % this year. Energy and food price inflation in particular 
is easing considerably. Core inflation (the rate excluding energy and food) is likewise 
declining markedly, but the disinflation process is much slower here. The core rate is 
likely to reach 3.1 % in 2024 before decreasing only relatively hesitantly to 2.5 % in 2025 
and 2.3 % in 2026. This is mainly due to the strongly rising labour costs. These will also 
spark another fairly robust surge in food prices, especially next year. Energy price 
inflation will then also pick up again. The headline  rate will drop to 2.7 % in 2025 HICP
and 2.2 % in 2026. The inflation outlook for 2024 and 2025 has been revised upwards 
slightly compared to the December 2023 Forecast for Germany. It remains unchanged 
for 2026. The revisions are mainly due to stronger services inflation, higher oil prices 
and somewhat sharper rises in food prices. 
The government deficit ratio decreases from 2.5 % in 2023 to 1.1 % in 2026. Until 2025, 
this will be due to the expiry of fiscal crisis assistance measures. The expiry of these 
measures will outweigh sharply rising expenditure in areas such as pensions, defence 
and staff. Beyond 2025, relief will stem chiefly from somewhat more restrained central 
government spending (including special funds) and a more favourable economic 
situation. The debt ratio falls and stands at just a little more than 60 % in 2026.
There are various risks to the economic outlook, such as those stemming from 
geopolitical conflicts.  Risks to inflation are currently tilted to the upside. Economic 
growth could pick up more quickly in the short term, but downside risks predominate 
over the medium term. 

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 18Item 2023 2024 2025 2026
Real , calendar adjusted GDP 0.0  0.3  1.1  1.4 
Real , unadjusted GDP − 0.2   0.2  1.0  1.6 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 6.0  2.8  2.7  2.2 
   Excluding energy and food 5.1  3.1  2.5  2.3 
Source: Federal Statistical Office (data as at 22 May 2024). Annual figures for 2024 to 2026 are Bundesbank projections.Table 2.1: June 2024 projection
Year-on-year percentage change

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 191. Macroeconomic outlook
1.1 German economy slowly regaining its footing
The German economy contracted somewhat over the last winter half-year 
(October 2023-March 2024).  Seasonally adjusted real  declined by 0.5 % in the GDP
fourth quarter of 2023, before rising again by 0.2 % in the first quarter of 2024.  In the 
short term, then, aggregate economic activity was somewhat weaker than expected in 
the Bundesbank’s December 2023 Forecast for Germany.  The sluggish demand in 
industry, in particular, proved to be more persistent. Against this backdrop, and in the 
face of heightened economic policy uncertainty combined with heavy cost burdens, 
firms throttled their domestic investment more sharply than anticipated. Households 
have not yet scaled up their consumption either, even though their real income has 
already improved markedly. Nonetheless, service providers’ activity has already 
rebounded significantly, even without impetus from consumption. The weakness in 
industry would have been more pronounced still had the energy-intensive sectors not 
upped their output again noticeably in the first quarter for the first time since the start 
of the energy crisis. In addition, the construction sector proved more robust than 
expected. This was due not only to the unusually mild weather conditions, but also to a 
more stable underlying trend in the non-residential sectors. 
The recovery is likely to continue and become broader in this quarter and the next.
 growth in the second quarter will probably be much the same as it was in the first GDP
quarter. However, this masks a slightly stronger underlying economic trend, as housing 
construction is expected to suffer a setback after the supportive effect of favourable  1) 
 2) 
 3) 
1 Seasonal adjustment here and in the remainder of this text also includes adjustment for calendar variations, 
provided they can be verified and quantified.
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a). However, it should be noted that the GDP data in the previous quarters 
were revised upwards slightly. The level of GDP in the first quarter of 2024 was therefore barely lower than 
projected in December 2023.
3 The Bundesbank completed this Forecast for Germany on 22 May 2024. It was incorporated into the 
projections for the euro area published by the ECB on 6 June 2024. This means that the projections were 
completed before the latest detailed national accounts data were published on 24 May 2024. It was therefore 
not possible to take into account revisions to the national accounts compared with the previous figures 
published on 23 February 2024 (or revised GDP figures compared with the flash estimate of 30 April 2024). Nor 
could the detailed figures for the first quarter be incorporated into the forecast.

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 20weather conditions in the previous quarter. At first, this stronger trend will mainly be 
driven by service providers. Their recovery is likely to continue, and should gain 
breadth and strength once private consumption starts providing stimulus again.  ifo
indicators for the business situation and business expectations suggest that this will be 
the case. Compared with the first quarter, these indicators improved significantly on 
average in April and May for service providers as a whole, but also in the retail sector 
and other consumer-related services sectors in particular. Business investment, on the 
other hand, will probably continue to decline at first. For this reason, and given that the 
level of new orders remains weak, industry is not expected to stage a major recovery in 
the short term. But at least production in energy-intensive sectors is likely to continue 
its upturn, and the automotive industry could already be providing a limited amount of 
growth stimulus.  Economic activity looks set to shift up another gear in the third 
quarter. Consumer activity will then probably continue to solidify and industry, in 
particular, should provide stronger impulses. Significantly brighter  business and ifo
export expectations in the manufacturing sector for the next six and three months, 
respectively, suggest that this could be the case. This is probably because global trade 
is expected to pick up gradually, which would benefit the export industry in particular. 
Growth continues at this faster pace in 2025 and gains some additional momentum 
in 2026.  It will continue to be driven by private consumption and exports, to begin with. 
 4) 
4 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2024a).

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 21Up until 2026, households will benefit from strong wage growth, falling inflation and a 
robust labour market. This will send their real disposable income sharply higher over 
the projection horizon. The saving ratio will also give consumption an additional boost 
as it returns to normal from its currently elevated level. Exports rise further on the back 
of growing sales markets but probably do not quite match their rate of growth. Private 
investment will no longer curb activity in 2025, but even so, it will not provide any 
noticeable stimulus until 2026, when the pace of aggregate economic growth will 
therefore increase again somewhat.
Item 2023 2024 2025 2026
Statistical carry-over at the end of the previous year1 − 0.2   − 0.3   0.4  0.4 
Fourth-quarter rate2 − 0.2   1.0  1.1  1.5 
Average annual  growth rate, calendar adjusted GDP 0.0  0.3  1.1  1.4 
Calendar effect3 − 0.2   0.0  − 0.1   0.3 
Average annual  growth rate GDP4 − 0.2   0.2  1.0  1.6 
Source: Federal Statistical Office (data as at 22 May 2024). Annual figures for 2024 to 2026 are Bundesbank projections.
 Seasonally and calendar-adjusted index level in the fourth quarter of the previous year in relation to the calendar-1
adjusted quarterly average of the previous year.   Annual rate of change in the fourth quarter, seasonally and calendar 2
adjusted.   As a percentage of .  Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding. 3 GDP 4
The German economy therefore gradually extricates itself from the bout of 
economic weakness it has experienced over the past two years.  Germany’s real , GDP
which has not grown on balance since the start of Russia’s war of aggression against 
Ukraine, will increase by a calendar-adjusted 0.3 % this year. In 2025 and 2026, German 
economic output will then expand more sharply, at rates of 1.1 % and 1.4 %, 
respectively.  The German economy will thus reach its potential output again in 2026, 
meaning that the output gap will then close.  The new figures broadly confirm the 
economic outlook presented in the December 2023 Forecast for Germany. The  GDP
rate for 2024 will be slightly weaker because its starting value at the end of the Table 2.2: Technical components of the GDP  growth projection
% or percentage points
 5) 
 6) 
5 As 2024 has somewhat fewer working days than 2023, unadjusted GDP growth is slightly lower when rounded 
to one decimal point. 2025 will likewise have somewhat fewer working days compared to the previous year, 
but then 2026 will have considerably more working days than 2025. At + 1.0 % and + 1.6 %, the unadjusted GDP 
rates will therefore be first slightly lower and then noticeably higher than the calendar-adjusted figures.
6 The estimated potential growth rates for 2024, 2025 and 2026 are + 0.4 %, + 0.5 % and + 0.6 %, respectively. 
These figures are almost unchanged from the December 2023 Forecast for Germany. For more information 
about this topic and conceptual issues relating to the Bundesbank’s estimation of potential output and the 
output gap, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a), p. 18.

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 22previous year was lower.  growth has been revised downwards a little for 2025 and GDP
upwards a little for 2026, as somewhat weaker growth in government consumption 
contrasts with somewhat stronger growth in private investment, the latter stemming 
from somewhat lower interest rate assumptions. In addition, part of the recovery in 
private consumption will be postponed. 
Item 2023 2024 2025 2026
GDP  (real, calendar adjusted)
   June 2024 projection 0.0  0.3  1.1  1.4 
   December 2023 projection − 0.1   0.4  1.2  1.3 
   Difference (in percentage points) 0.1  − 0.1   − 0.1   0.1 
Table 2.3a: Revisions since the December 2023 projection
Year-on-year percentage change

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 23Supplementary information
Underlying conditions for the Forecast for Germany
The Forecast for Germany is based on joint assumptions by Eurosystem experts 
about the global economy, exchange rates, commodity prices and interest rates.  
These assumptions are based on information that was available on 15 May 2024. The 
projection incorporates fiscal policy measures as soon as they are sufficiently specified 
and their implementation is considered likely. 
The global economy grows moderately over the projection horizon.  Global 
economic activity showed somewhat stronger growth in the fourth quarter of 2023 and 
the first quarter of 2024 than assumed in the December 2023 Forecast for Germany. 
This was a reflection of the renewed momentum in domestic activity in the United 
States at the end of the year. In addition, economic policy stimuli and lively export 
business supported economic activity in China more strongly than expected at the 
time. Following recent higher rates, moderate growth is expected in global economic 
activity over the projection horizon. With growth of 3.3 % on average for this year and 
the next, and of 3.2 % in 2026, the projected dynamics were changed only slightly 
compared with the December projection. Disinflation is projected to continue in many 
countries, although services inflation is proving to be sticky in many places.
The economic recovery process in the other euro area countries continues.  
Economic development figures in the other euro area countries on which the projection 
is based are derived from the forecasts of the national central banks, which were 
incorporated into the projection for the euro area published by the ECB on 6 June 2024.
 For the euro area excluding Germany, economic growth is therefore expected to 
increase from a rate of 1.1 % this year to 1.6 % in 2025 and 1.7 % in 2026. This is broadly 
in line with the December 2023 forecast. 
Global trade and German sales markets start recovering this year and expand in 
2025 and 2026 in line with global economic growth.  Global trade fell short of the 
December projection in the fourth quarter of 2023 and the first quarter of 2024. 
Continued global adjustment processes in goods and services trade after the 
pandemic, alongside some one-off factors, are likely to have played a role here.  
Nevertheless, global trade has firmed up somewhat of late following a long period of 
weakness, and is expected to pick up over the projection horizon.  Following an increase 
of 2.6 % on average for the current year, growth rates of 3.3 % are expected for 2025 [1]
[2]
[3]
[4]

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 24and 2026, which would be on a par with global economic growth. That said, imports by 
Germany’s trading partners within the euro area and by some other advanced 
economies, which account for a large share of German export markets, will be 
somewhat weaker than global trade at first. For this reason, German exporters’ sales 
markets will continue to show less momentum this year than global trade. Higher sales 
market growth is expected in 2025 and 2026, in line with global trade momentum.
Item 2023 2024 2025 2026
Exchange rates of the euro  
US dollar/euro 1.08  1.08  1.08  1.08 
   Effective1 121.8   124.0   124.2   124.2  
Interest rates  
   Three-month EURIBOR 3.4  3.6  2.8  2.5 
   Yield on government bonds outstanding2 2.5  2.4  2.4  2.4 
Prices  
   Crude oil3 83.7   83.8   78.0   74.5  
   Natural gas4 40.6   30.8   35.4   29.9  
   Electricity4,5 103.5   73.0   87.7   72.8  
   Other commodities6,7 − 12.5   11.4   3.9  0.9 
   Food7,8 − 2.1   − 1.2   0.8  − 0.3  
German exporters’ sales markets7,9 0.2  1.6  3.3  3.3 
1 Compared with 42 currencies of major trading partners of the euro area ( − 42 group of currencies);  1999 = 100.  EER Q1
 Yield on German government bonds outstanding with a residual maturity of over nine and up to ten years.    2 3US
dollars per barrel of Brent crude oil.   Euro per .  Wholesale prices in the euro area based on data from the 5 MWh 5
European Central Bank.   In  dollars.   Year-on-year percentage change.   Producer prices for food in the euro area 6 US 7 8
based on data from the European Commission. In euro.  Calendar adjusted. 9
Despite moving in opposite directions of late, energy commodity prices generally 
decline over the projection horizon.  Against the backdrop of the conflict in the Middle 
East, crude oil prices have picked up slightly since December. Another noteworthy 
development in this context were the further production cutbacks by some  OPEC
countries and their partners. Forward prices point to a decline in prices over the course 
of this year and the next two years, but are somewhat higher than those reported in 
the December projection. European wholesale gas prices, meanwhile, have fallen 
significantly at times since last December. Weak gas demand – caused in part by 
weather conditions – and stable gas supplies contributed to this. Forward prices 
suggest that gas prices will rise slightly in the autumn, before falling back again after 
winter 2025‑26. Overall, however, they remain markedly below the path assumed in the Table 2.4: Major assumptions of the projection

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 25December 2023 projection. European electricity prices, which move closely in line with 
gas prices, are expected to follow similar patterns.
Other commodity price inflation falls and agricultural producer prices continue to 
decline slightly at first before largely levelling off.  Recent months have seen other 
commodity prices rise mainly on the back of higher food commodity prices. In 
particular, global cocoa prices spiked sharply higher at times amid repeated crop 
failures. Amongst industrial raw materials, many metal prices have also recorded 
marked increases of late. For non-energy commodity prices as a whole, forward prices 
for 2025 and 2026 point to significantly smaller price increases than on average in the 
current year. Euro area agricultural producer prices will continue to fall slightly on 
average this year. The forward prices for 2025 and 2026 suggest that any changes will 
be minor. However, following an increase last winter, they remain above the level 
shown in the December projection. 
Against the backdrop of an unchanged monetary policy stance since December, 
interest rate assumptions continue to decline slightly.  At its monetary policy 
meetings in December 2023 and in January, March and April 2024, the Governing 
Council of the  left the key interest rates unchanged. It judged that the key interest ECB
rates are at levels that are making a substantial contribution to the ongoing disinflation 
process, as prices move back towards target levels. Against the backdrop of this largely 
unchanged monetary policy stance,  forward rates continued to point EURIBOR
downwards at the cut-off date. Forward rates for this year and next are on a par with 
those reported in the December projection, and slightly lower for 2026. For ten-year 


Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 26federal bonds (Bunds), forward prices for the next two years show a broadly constant 
yield that is somewhat below the assumptions made for the December projection. 
Financing costs for bank loans are expected to see a slight decline and to be somewhat 
lower overall than in the December projection. 
The value of the euro has remained broadly unchanged against the US dollar since 
December 2023, but has appreciated slightly in nominal effective terms. In the 
period used to derive the exchange rate assumptions, the euro stood at $1.08, the US
same price as in December. However, gains in the euro against some Asian and central 
European currencies contributed to a slight appreciation of 0.6 % in relation to 41 
currencies important for German foreign trade. 
Crisis-related fiscal measures are rolled back significantly in 2024 and phased out in 
2025.  Seen in isolation, this means that the general government deficit ratio will fall by 
just over 1 percentage point this year and by ½ a percentage point next year. The most 
relevant factor for 2024 is that the energy price brakes ended in 2023 and thus no 
longer have any impact this year. In addition,  rates on food in restaurants, natural   VAT
gas and heating increased again after being temporarily reduced during the crises. In 
2025, the government budget will mainly be relieved by the fact that the practice of 
using inflation compensation bonuses to exempt wage components from tax and social 
security contributions will be discontinued. 
Further measures increase both government revenue and expenditure significantly 
by 2026.  The higher revenue and expenditure are partly related. It is assumed that 
health and long-term care insurance funds will finance their rising expenditure through 
gradually increasing social contribution rates. In addition, increased truck tolls will 
generate additional revenue, much of which flows into the federal government’s rail 
network via investment grants. Revenue from carbon emission allowances also rises 
significantly over each year of the projection, financing expenditure by the Climate 
Fund. Profit-related taxes will benefit, mainly as of 2025, from the fact that accelerated 
write-offs were possible in the past years and that, therefore, fewer write-offs are now 
pending. By contrast, significant revenue shortfalls are expected to result from the fact 
that the income tax rate fell at the beginning of 2024 in order to compensate for the 
bracket creep in the previous year. It is assumed that legislators will continue this 
practice in 2025 and 2026. Moderate tax shortfalls will also come about due to the 
Growth Opportunities Act  and a lower electricity tax for ( ) Wachstumschancengesetz
enterprises in the manufacturing sector in 2024 and 2025.
 
 

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 271.  
2.  
3.  
4.  All data on global economic growth and global trade refer to global aggregates excluding the euro area.
See Deutsche Bundesbank (2024b).
See European Central Bank (2024).
For example, one automobile manufacturer in Japan halting production was also reflected in lower imports 
worldwide; see Deutsche Bundesbank (2024b). By contrast, the impact of disruptions to shipping in the Red 
Sea is likely to have been very limited; see Deutsche Bundesbank (2024c).

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 281.2 Economic recovery driven by private consumption and exports; 
investment does not play a role again until 2026
Private consumption recovers strongly over the projection horizon, making it a 
mainstay of the economic recovery.  Households’ consumption behaviour has been 
shaped mainly by precautionary motives of late, which should be viewed against the 
backdrop of the long economic downturn, the sharply higher consumer prices and the 
corresponding losses in real income, as well as the uncertain economic conditions and 
outlook. In addition, the higher interest rates created incentives to save that were 
absent during the long period when interest rates were low. By contrast, real wages, 
which were already rising again significantly, had less of an impact on consumption, 
meaning that the saving ratio rose again substantially at the beginning of the year. 
Now, though, the robust wage rises are broadly based and increasingly taking the form 
of large, permanent wage increases rather than one-off inflation compensation 
bonuses. Combined with a robust labour market and easing inflation, strong wage 
growth leads to a sharp rise in real disposable income, especially this year. This will 
soon recoup the real income losses observed in recent years. Over the next few years, 
there will be further, perceptible gains in real income. The significant rise in income will 
therefore become a determining factor for consumption, while precautionary motives 
will gradually recede into the background. The recent brightening of the GfK consumer 
climate supports this assumption. Private consumption is therefore likely to pick up 
again slightly as early as the current quarter before gaining momentum in the second 
half of the year. After that, it will outpace real disposable income somewhat for a time, 
gradually pushing the saving ratio back down towards its long-term average. 

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 29From the second half of the year onwards, exports act as a second prop to the 
economy.  Up to the middle of the year, though, they will probably increase slightly at 
most. Export-oriented industry, in particular, is suffering from weak foreign demand, 
with new orders from abroad in the first quarter falling significantly short of the 
previous quarter’s average. The second half of the year, however, is likely to see the 
expansion in exports pick up somewhat and then continue at roughly the same pace. 
The cyclical recovery in global trade underlying the projection provides important 
tailwinds here. In keeping with this, export expectations as surveyed by the info 
Institute recently brightened somewhat, and  business expectations in the industrial ifo
sector signal a clear upturn. Furthermore, the recovery in energy-intensive industry 
that set in during the first quarter is likely to continue at a moderate pace over the 
projection horizon, buoying export activity.  That said, the German export industry is 
currently operating in a challenging international competitive environment, meaning 
that external demand impulses are not necessarily providing the same degree of 
support for exports that they long used to. Over the past four years, growth in exports 
has lagged considerably behind growth in sales markets. Business surveys likewise 
 7) 
 8) 7 For more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2024a). As hitherto, the forecast does not assume a full 
recovery of energy-intensive production in Germany.

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 30suggest that the competitive position has deteriorated markedly of late.  The 
comparatively high domestic price and wage pressures, in particular, will intensify the 
headwinds facing German exporters over the projection horizon. The loss of price 
competitiveness that this entails is likely to mean that the German export industry loses 
further ground in the market over the projection horizon, causing exports to grow at a 
somewhat slower pace than sales markets.
Business investment does not start to expand again until 2025.  The prevailing 
investment environment is a difficult one for enterprises. The continuing weakness in 
industrial foreign demand is dampening firms’ propensity to invest. In addition, the 
tightening of monetary policy meant that interest rates on loans to enterprises rose 
significantly, and net lending to firms came to a standstill from the end of 2022. 
Domestic investment is also being held back by other constraints: firms surveyed by the 
Bundesbank cited high energy and wage costs as important factors, as well as the 
shortage of skilled workers, uncertainty about the regulatory framework and a high tax 
 8) 
 9) 8 See ifo Institute (2024) and German Chamber of Commerce and Industry (2023), which reports that the 
primary complaints voiced by firms relate to the still high energy costs and regulatory framework conditions. 
However, the availability of skilled workers is also increasingly being perceived as a problem.

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 31and social security burden.  Against this backdrop, sentiment among capital goods 
producers has dimmed markedly, according to information from the  Institute. ifo
Business investment is therefore likely to continue its recent decline for now. Only 
towards the end of this year will it return to a moderate growth path as the effects of 
monetary policy tightening fade gradually and a renewed uptick in foreign demand 
stimulates domestic investment. Efforts to transition to a climate-neutral economy will 
provide additional stimulus. Come 2026, business investment will be a significant factor 
driving  growth again. GDP
Housing investment is expected to decline significantly again this year, owing to 
weak demand, before nudging upwards again.  Household demand for housing 
continues to be inhibited by the high price of construction, increased financing cost and 
real income losses seen over the past three years. New orders in housing construction 
have not yet recovered appreciably from the weak level they have been languishing at 
ever since the end of 2022. Building permits do not appear to have picked up yet either. 
According to the  Institute, housing construction firms continue to report a severe ifo
lack of orders. The current quarter will also probably see a significant drop in housing 
investment and this will be driven mainly by weather-related rebound effects. The 
unusually mild weather conditions had a bolstering effect in the first quarter. Housing 
investment is likely to decline somewhat further in the second half of the year, given 
 9) 
9 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2024d).

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 32weak demand. Looking beyond the cyclical headwinds, though, there is a fundamental 
demand for additional housing in Germany. One reason for this lies in the high level of 
immigration; although it declines over the projection horizon, immigration is still a 
source of slight population growth even amid demographic change. The high demand 
for housing is also reflected in rental price inflation, which stands well above its long-
term average. In addition, with energy costs high and climate policy’s “heating 
transition” under way, there continues to be strong demand for renovation work to 
upgrade the energy efficiency of the housing stock, and this should buoy housing 
investment throughout the projection horizon. Lastly, as real disposable household 
incomes rise significantly and financing costs recede again slightly, housing investment 
will start growing again slowly next year and pick up a little more steam in 2026. 
Real government demand supports economic growth over the whole projection 
horizon.  A key reason for this is the significant rise in military spending up to 2026. The 
procurement of military equipment, such as aircraft, will lead to significantly larger 
government investment. Ammunitions procurement will keep government 
consumption rising, as will soaring expenditure on healthcare and long-term care. 
Imports climb sharply in the period to 2026 and play a part in bringing the current 
account balance down slightly after its significant increase.  A distinct upturn in 
domestic demand will cause imports to far outpace exports up to the end of the 
projection horizon, with exports comparatively subdued in their expansion due to 
pressures on competitiveness. Taken in isolation, this will exert a dampening effect on 
the current account. However, the current account surplus is likely to start out with 
another moderate increase this year, rising to 7.5 % of . That increase will be GDP
helped along primarily by a marked improvement in the terms of trade, which will drive 
up the trade balance. Over the remainder of the projection period, the terms of trade 
will see only a small relative improvement, and the trade balance surplus will fall 
slightly overall in 2025 and 2026. The current account surplus, too, will shrink again 
slightly over the projection horizon, dropping to just over 7 % in 2026.
1.3 Labour market tightness on the rise again
The labour market remained stable in the 2023‑24 winter half-year despite the 
ongoing weakness in the economy.  Unemployment rose a little, but employment rose 
slightly as well. Employment in the temporary agency work sector – a domain that is 
sensitive to cyclical developments – declined significantly. This contrasted with steady 
employment growth in services sectors where structural factors are driving a need for 
more staff, one example being healthcare and long-term care. Overall, the increase in 
employment slightly exceeded the expectations from the December 2023 Forecast for 

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 33Germany. All in all, the labour market’s response to the economic slowdown has been 
mild: the period of weakness spanning roughly two years brought with it a gradual 
increase in unemployment, moderately elevated short-time work, muted working hours 
and a slight decline in vacancies. The degree of tightness in the German labour market 
thus eased slightly, but it remained at a high level. The pronounced tightness reflects 
structural conditions in a German labour market characterised mainly by demographic 
headwinds. Accordingly, parts of the economy continue to experience a pronounced 
shortage of skilled workers.
Employment is likely to carry on growing moderately for now, and unemployment is 
expected to rise somewhat, before falling again at the end of the year.  Following a 
long downturn, recruitment plans in trade and industry now appear to be bottoming 
out. After two years in which core staffing levels were largely retained even in the face 
of adverse economic conditions, their working hours are likely to be the first area to 
recover as the improvement in economic activity slowly takes hold. Meanwhile, 
unemployment is likely to rise slightly for a few months more. The unemployment 
barometer compiled by the Institute for Employment Research ( ) remains in IAB
negative territory, indicating an increase, but the indicator has been heading towards 
neutral in recent months. People registered as unemployed still have a relatively low 
chance of being hired at present. Concerning the recruitment rate for Ukrainian 
refugees, though, there has been a significant improvement, albeit based on a very low 
level to begin with. As the economic recovery gains traction, unemployment is likely to 
fall again slowly towards the end of 2024. On an annual average for 2024, the 
unemployment rate will nevertheless end up slightly higher than in the previous year, 
and employment growth in 2024 will be significantly weaker than in the last two years.

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 34As of 2025, demographic developments limit the labour supply, and labour market 
tightness rises considerably again.  The shortage of skilled workers will become more 
pronounced again over the remainder of the projection horizon. This is because 
employment is already at a very high level and, in view of the prevailing demographic 
challenges, can no longer grow as strongly as it has in previous years. The labour force 
participation rate will then stop rising owing to the unfavourable age structure in 
Germany, even if the individual propensity to work carries on increasing. This can only 
be offset to a degree by immigration. First, integrating new immigrants into the labour 
market is time-consuming and does not happen straightaway. Second, this projection 
assumes that the current high level of immigration will gradually normalise.  As a 
result, labour force numbers will go up only slightly in 2025 and fall somewhat in 2026. 
Given that the economic recovery will also bring a rise in demand for labour, tightness 
in the labour market will re-intensify considerably. 
 10) 
10 The assumptions on immigration have been revised upwards from those presented in the December 2023 
projection. In 2023, net immigration – at roughly 650,000 persons – was somewhat higher than had been 
reckoned with at the time. For the next two years, the assumptions have been revised upwards by 100,000 
persons apiece compared with the December projection. Nevertheless, the expectation of a net immigration 
balance of 300,000 persons in 2026 still stands. With regard to the Ukrainian refugees, it is not assumed that 
there will be any sizeable new inflows nor any substantial emigration back to their home country.

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 35Employment growth comes to a standstill at the end of the projection horizon, 
despite falling unemployment.  Employment growth weakens slightly as supply 
bottlenecks increase and comes to a halt in the course of 2026. Unemployment falls 
slightly in 2025 and 2026, but will no longer open up any substantial scope for 
additional employment. To begin with, working hours per employee keep on going up 
as people work more overtime and part-time employees raise their working hours. 
However, this increase is expected to taper off significantly towards the end of the 
projection horizon as the demographic shifts in the age structure also dampen average 
working hours.  The economic recovery would then be increasingly borne by rising 
labour productivity on the back of increased capacity utilisation on the part of firms and 
sectoral shifts in the forces of growth, amongst other factors. Industry in particular 
once again contributes considerably to  growth as exports rise. Lastly, the longer GDP
the many immigrants who have arrived over the past two years remain in Germany, the 
bigger the boost to productivity will be, in particular thanks to their growing 
professional experience, the acquisition and recognition of qualifications and language 
skills, and a profile that better fits the vacancies on offer.
 11) 
11 For example, there is likely to be an increased preference for part-time work.

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 361.4 Wages continue to rise sharply in 2024, and with less impetus, but 
still strongly, thereafter
Recently, upward pressure on wages has been considerably greater than expected.  
The majority of the most recent collective labour agreements exceeded the 
expectations presented in the December 2023 Forecast for Germany. This was reflected 
in a sharp rise in negotiated wages in the first quarter of 2024, but will also extend far 
into the coming quarters. For example, the latest collective labour agreement in the 
retail trade sector, which was reached after more than one year of negotiations, will 
result in substantial wage rises mainly in the second half of the year.  Wages also 
rose more strongly than expected across the broader economy. The forecast for both 
negotiated earnings and actual earnings was therefore revised significantly upwards in 
2024.
Negotiated wages rise sharply this year and continue to see strong growth in 
subsequent years, but to a considerably lesser degree.  According to the new forecast, 
negotiated wages will rise by 5.9 % on an annual average in 2024. Trade unions are still 
striving to recoup the losses in real wages from previous years that have not yet been 
fully offset. Their wage demands remain high and they are successfully negotiating 
comparatively strong results. Furthermore, the employee side is well aware that the 
temporary compensation of purchasing power provided by tax-free and social security 
contribution-exempt inflation compensation bonuses will disappear when these 
bonuses are phased out at the end of the year. The slight slowdown in the labour 
market is likely to dampen wage growth only marginally. Inflation compensation 
bonuses are currently still making a large contribution to growth in negotiated wages. 
However, their relevance is likely to diminish over the course of the year, while the 
significance of the permanent wage components will probably grow. By 2025, inflation 
compensation bonuses will have been completely phased out, which will result in 
negative base effects on annual rates of growth. For this reason in particular, wage 
growth will then slow markedly.  In addition, in an environment of lower inflation 
rates, it is also expected that new collective labour agreements will be somewhat lower  12) 
 13) 
 14) 12 The forecast assumes that the collective labour agreement in the Hamburg retail trade sector of 8 May 2024 
will be applied similarly to all of the other wage-bargaining areas in this sector. The agreement includes large 
back payments, which have a strong one-off wage-raising effect. The retroactive increase in scheduled rates of 
pay of 5.3 % from October 2023 and 4.7 % from May 2024 will prospectively be paid out in the third quarter of 
2024. In addition, an inflation compensation bonus of € 1,000 will be paid out in July. The proposed collective 
labour agreement in the main construction sector of 29 May 2024 was too late to be factored into the forecast. 
Overall, this is significantly higher than assumed in the forecast.
13 The one-off effect from the high back payments in the retail trade sector also ceases to have an impact.

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 37than in the previous two years.  On balance, negotiated wages are projected to rise 
at a rate of 2.7 % in 2025. In 2026, the renewed tightening of the labour market and the 
more favourable economic situation will be reflected by an increase in negotiated 
wages of 3.1 %. 
Growth of actual earnings remain consistently somewhat above growth of 
negotiated wages over the projection horizon.  This year, actual earnings will grow by 
6 %, and thus roughly as strongly as in 2023. They will thus only slightly exceed 
negotiated wages. One reason for this slightly positive gap – known as “wage drift” – is 
the established practice of paying out performance bonuses, which were marginally 
higher this year than in the previous year. Wage drift will increase in 2025, mainly  
due to rising working hours, and will remain markedly positive in 2026, too, particularly 
as a result of increasing labour market shortages. On balance, actual earnings rise by 
3.2 % in 2025 and 3.5 % in 2026. These rates are considerably higher than the historical 
average since German reunification. Compensation per employee will even rise slightly 
 14) 
 15) 
14 All past pay agreements included in the Bundesbank’s negotiated wage statistics (around 550 collective wage 
agreements and provisions governing civil servant pay) are factored into the forecasts of negotiated wage 
increases. They are extrapolated beyond their contractual terms, taking into account the overall economic 
situation and industry-specific factors.
15 Compared with December, the forecast for actual earnings was revised upwards to a less significant degree 
than the forecast for negotiated wages. One factor contributing to this is a one-off effect in the retail trade 
sector: in the run-up to the most recent collective labour agreement, some individual employers had already 
granted early, voluntary pay rises. Taken in isolation, this has a dampening effect on wage drift in 2024.

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 38more strongly, especially in 2025, as there will be a marked increase in employers’ 
social contributions.
High profit margins normalise.  Unit labour costs will continue to exert very significant 
pressure, as the economy is set to grow only slightly this year, with robust employment 
but very high wage growth. However, enterprises are likely to mitigate this to some 
degree by reducing profits. This is because, compared with previous years, when they 
were able to expand their profit margins sharply, supply bottlenecks have now been 
resolved and demand has weakened significantly – in part, due to tighter monetary 
policy. According to  Institute surveys on production constraints, insufficient demand ifo
now outweighs supply-side factors in many sectors. Aggregate profit margins will 
therefore fall steeply in 2024 and return roughly to their pre-pandemic levels. As a 
result, substantial domestic inflation will recede significantly despite sharply rising unit 
labour costs. From 2025 onwards, in addition to more moderate wage growth, the 
recovery in labour productivity will contribute to the high level of unit labour costs 
diminishing markedly. Against this backdrop, domestic inflation as measured by the 
 deflator will fall noticeably, from 6.6 % last year to 3.7 % this year and then 2.2 % in GDP
2026.
 16) 
16 See the comments on the underlying conditions of this projection.

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 391.5 Consumer price inflation diminishes only slowly
The disinflation process continues, but core inflation is more persistent than 
anticipated.  Consumer price inflation, as measured by the , continued to decline HICP
during the past winter half-year. According to the flash estimate, the rate stood at 2.8 % 
in May, which was marginally lower than expected in the Forecast for Germany last 
December. This was attributable mainly to a larger decrease in energy prices. However, 
contrary to expectations in the December 2023 forecast, the rate excluding energy and 
food (i.e. the core rate) did not decline any further between November and May. This 
was attributable to services, for which prices mostly grew to a greater degree than 
expected. The same is true for rents. Most recently, rents rose by 2.2 %. This is almost 
twice as much as the average rent increase since 1999. By contrast, price pressures for 
non-energy industrial goods decreased somewhat faster than projected.
On average this year, the rate of inflation is likely to more than halve, with the core 
rate declining more slowly.  Particularly due to the high cost pressure from wages, it is 
also unlikely that the strong price inflation for services will abate significantly over the 
remainder of the year. Non-energy industrial goods inflation, meanwhile, should 
decline more sharply. This is attributable to a number of factors: first, wages comprise 
 17) 

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 40a smaller proportion of costs for these goods than for services.  Second, and more 
significantly, these goods had experienced a stronger surge in prices caused by supply-
side disruptions resulting from the coronavirus pandemic and the war in Ukraine, 
which is now rapidly subsiding. Lastly, price setting for industrial goods is much more 
flexible.  The core rate overall will thus fall from 5.1 % last year to 3.1 % on an annual 
average in 2024. Disinflation will be even greater for food products; price inflation for 
these products, which was still in double-digits last year, will abate broadly to its pre-
crisis level of just over 2 %. This is due to both falling agricultural producer prices as 
well as lower wholesale electricity prices and lower natural gas prices. Furthermore, the 
latter will mean that energy inflation, which had already fallen sharply last year, will 
continue to decline somewhat this year.  An even greater drop in energy inflation is 
being prevented by a rise in the carbon price on fossil fuels as well as the normalisation 
of the  rate on gas and district heating following its temporary reduction.  The VAT
headline  rate is thus likely to decline to 2.8 % on an annual average this year, HICP
more than halving compared to 2023.  17) 
 18) 
 19) 
 20) 
17 For more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2019a).
18 For more information, see Gautier et al. (2024).
19 These were also the reason that the expiry of the price brakes at the end of 2023 did not play any significant 
role in the dynamics of consumer prices for gas and electricity.
20 In January 2024, the fixed price per tonne of carbon emissions was raised from € 30 to € 45. This is likely to 
have increased headline HICP inflation by ¼ percentage point. In January 2025, the price will be raised from 
€ 45 to € 55. The maximum price of € 65 is assumed as of January 2026. It is expected that these rises will 
increase HICP inflation by 0.15 percentage point each. For a calculation of the impact based on the originally 
expected price path, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b).

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 41Over the remainder of projection period, inflation now declines only slowly in light 
of the high wage pressures.  The core rate is expected to continue to decline, first to 
2.5 % in 2025 and then to 2.3 % in 2026. This is because monetary policy tightening still 
has an impact and the sharp rise in unit labour costs diminishes. However, the rise in 
wages, which remains comparatively strong, will lead to above-average increases in 
prices, especially for services. For energy, price inflation will go up again noticeably in 
2025. Gas prices are assumed to decline. That said, the carbon price will continue to be 
raised, wholesale prices for electricity are assumed to rise markedly, and the temporary 
uptick in crude oil prices will continue to be felt to a certain degree in some cases. In 
2026, falling crude oil and natural gas prices will then partially offset the further rise in 
the carbon price. Energy will then once again have more of a dampening effect on 
headline inflation. Food inflation will pick up again, especially in 2025. This is because 
the earlier growth in wages is driving prices, and the previous dampening effect from 
agricultural producer prices will disappear as these prices will not decline any further. 
Overall, headline  inflation will drop to 2.7 % in 2025 and 2.2 % in 2026. HICP
 
 


Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 42Item 2023 2024 2025 2026
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
   June 2024 projection 6.0  2.8  2.7  2.2 
   December 2023 projection 6.1  2.7  2.5  2.2 
   Difference (in percentage points) − 0.1   0.1  0.2  0.0 Table 2.3b: Revisions since the December 2023 projection
Year-on-year percentage change

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 432 Outlook for public finances
The deficit ratio declines from 2.5 % in 2023 to 1.8 % in 2024, primarily due to the 
expiry of energy crisis measures  (see the section on the underlying conditions for this 
projection). This drop would be greater were it not for the steep increase in other 
expenditure, such as defence spending and transfers to Ukraine. Furthermore, outlays 
on staff and pensions are set to rise significantly, mainly on the back of the high 
inflation of the past few years. Weak economic activity will burden the budget only 
moderately, mostly because the labour market is expected to remain robust. In 
particular, wages and salaries, which yield high levels of revenue, will see continued 
dynamic growth, with unemployment being only slightly heightened.
The deficit ratio declines to 1.6 % in 2025 and 1.1 % in 2026 because wage 
components are no longer exempt from tax and social security contributions and 
the Climate Fund scales back its spending.  A number of steeply rising expenditure 
items will weigh on the government budget, however. Not least, spending on pensions 
will increase dynamically, driven by a combination of strong aggregate wage growth 
and increased retirement numbers. In addition, funding costs for government debt will 
rise, pushing up interest expenditure substantially. Weak economic activity will still 
affect the government budget in 2025. In 2026, the cyclical effect will essentially have 
come to an end.

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 44The structural budgetary position deteriorates up to 2025 before improving 
somewhat thereafter.  Disregarding the transitional influences from temporary crisis 
measures and economic activity (that is to say, viewed in structural terms), the deficit 
ratio in 2026 will be 1 %, up from ½% in 2023. This is mainly due to strongly increasing 
spending on pensions, defence and staff, in particular. Central government outlays will 
rise substantially, mainly in 2024, with much of central government's reserves in the 
core budget and the Climate Fund being depleted over the course of the year. This will 
push up central government’s structural deficit, which will then decrease again slightly 
next year and somewhat more strongly in 2026. In parallel to this, though, the 
structural budgetary position of the statutory pension insurance scheme deteriorates 
gradually.
The Maastricht debt ratio declines to 60.7 % by end-2026 because of strong growth 
in nominal GDP . At the end of 2023, the debt ratio stood at 63.6 %. The ratio-reducing 
impact of nominal  growth is expected to outweigh the debt-increasing deficits. GDP
While central government will borrow more to build up the generational capital fund,
there is a decline in the debt accrued in connection with coronavirus assistance loans as 
well as the bad bank portfolios dating back to the financial crisis. Including the share of 
 21) 
21 For information on the plans to create a generational capital fund, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b).

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 45 debt that Germany will ultimately have to shoulder, the debt ratio is higher and EU
likely to decline at a slower pace: expanded to account for this share, the debt ratio is 
expected to fall from 65 % in 2023 to just over 63 % in 2026. 22) 
22 A share of consolidated EU debt that roughly equates to Germany’s financial contribution to the EU budget is 
included here. For more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2024e).

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 463 Risk assessment
The macroeconomic projections presented here are subject to a number of 
uncertainties.  Overall, risks to inflation are currently tilted to the upside. There are 
upside risks that economic growth will pick up more quickly in the short term, but 
downside risks predominate over the medium term.
Geopolitical tensions continue to shape the uncertainty outlook, presenting upside 
risks to inflation and downside risks to economic output.  In particular, Russia’s war 
against Ukraine and the conflict in the Middle East could intensify or spread, adversely 
affecting the supply of energy commodities in the global market and disrupting supply 
chains. This could drive up import prices for energy and other goods, directly resulting 
in a rise in Germany’s inflation rate as well as weighing on economic activity. An 
escalation of trade policy tensions or an uptick in geopolitical fragmentation could have 
similar ramifications.
Inflation could turn out to be stickier if wages increase more strongly, if profit 
margins do not decline or if rents rise more substantially.  Stronger than expected 
wage growth could endanger the disinflation process. This could be the result of 
employees applying higher inflation expectations in their wage negotiations, for one 
thing. For another, in view of the tight labour market, employees may be able to push 
through even higher wage increases than assumed in this projection. In addition, profit 
margins could prove stickier, leaving price pressures high for longer. Both factors could 
produce stronger inflation, in particular for services, which are already more dynamic 
overall than previously expected. Services prices could gain additional traction if rents 
rise more steeply on the back of a limited housing supply.
The international competitiveness of the German economy could deteriorate more 
substantially than expected.  In the event of geopolitical crises, the import prices of 
energy and other intermediate goods – and thus the relative production costs in 
Germany as a business location – could see a more protracted increase. Significantly 
stronger domestic wage growth could have a similar effect, potentially resulting in 
some enterprises scaling back their production operations in Germany or relocating  23) 
23 Rents account for a relatively high share of the HICP (around 10 %).

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 47abroad. In addition, the German industrial sector could see its competitiveness decline 
for other reasons, such as corporate decisions in a setting that is currently 
characterised in particular by uncertain future framework conditions and structural 
change. For example, enterprises might cling to outdated technology in spite of 
structural shifts in demand due to climate change. This could leave exports at risk of 
benefiting less from rising foreign demand than assumed in this projection, resulting in 
weaker  growth.  GDP
That said, economic activity could improve sooner than expected, at least in the 
short term.  Particularly in the short term, private consumption and business 
investment might pick up more strongly. Should consumers’ precautionary motives 
subside sooner than anticipated, private consumption could increase more quickly.  
With real disposable income recovering strongly this year, consumption expenditure 
could grow more quickly than expected, and the saving ratio could decline faster than 
assumed. In this scenario, however, consumption growth would probably be less 
pronounced in the following years. Business sentiment, too, could improve more 
strongly, potentially leading to an earlier recovery in business investment. Lastly, it is 
also possible that exports will gain traction sooner. The past weakness in exports could 
turn out to be more of a predominantly cyclical phenomenon than a persistent issue 
with Germany’s competitiveness. As global trade recovers, exports could then also see 
a stronger uptick than anticipated. Taken together, these factors would result in 
greater capacity utilisation in the economy. Particularly in the event of a stronger 
upswing in domestic demand, this would leave inflation pressures higher than 
expected. This could slow the disinflation process and thus add a further upside risk to 
the inflation outlook.
Item 202322024 2025 2026
GDP  (real) 0.0  0.3  1.1  1.4 
GDP  (real, unadjusted) − 0.2   0.2  1.0  1.6 
Components of real GDP  
   Private consumption − 0.6   0.7  1.8  1.5 
   Memo item: Saving ratio 11.4   12.6   11.7   11.0   24) 
Table 2.5: Key figures of the macroeconomic projection
Year-on-year percentage change, calendar adjusted1
24 For example, the UEFA European Championship (men’s tournament) in Germany in June and July 2024 could 
help brighten consumer sentiment sooner. The forecast assumes that the effect on economic activity will be 
very limited, which is in keeping with the findings made in the academic literature. Barrios et al. (2016), for 
instance, find no clear evidence in their literature review to suggest that major sporting events significantly 
increase aggregate output.

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 48   Government consumption − 1.5   1.0  1.2  1.8 
   Gross fixed capital formation − 0.2   − 0.6   1.0  2.3 
      Business investment3 1.1  − 1.9   0.5  1.6 
      Private housing construction investment − 2.9   − 1.8   0.1  1.8 
   Exports − 1.7   0.9  2.1  2.3 
   Imports − 3.0   0.3  3.2  3.2 
   Memo item: Current account balance4 6.7  7.5  7.3  7.1 
Contributions to  growth GDP5  
   Domestic final demand − 0.5   0.3  1.4  1.6 
   Changes in inventories − 0.1   − 0.2   0.0  0.0 
   Exports − 0.8   0.4  1.0  1.0 
   Imports 1.5  − 0.1   − 1.3   − 1.4  
Labour market  
   Total number of hours worked6 0.7  0.1  0.8  0.2 
   Employed persons6 0.7  0.3  0.3  0.1 
   Unemployed persons7 2.6  2.7  2.6  2.5 
   Unemployment rate8 5.7  5.9  5.6  5.4 
   Memo item:  unemployment rateILO9 3.0  3.2  3.1  3.0 
Wages and wage costs  
   Negotiated wages10 4.0  5.9  2.7  3.1 
   Gross wages and salaries per employee 6.1  6.0  3.2  3.5 
   Compensation per employee 5.8  6.1  3.4  3.6 
   Real  per employed person GDP − 0.7   0.0  0.8  1.3 
   Unit labour costs11 6.5  6.1  2.6  2.2 
   Memo item:  deflator GDP 6.6  3.7  2.8  2.2 
   
Consumer prices12 6.0  2.8  2.7  2.2 
   Excluding energy 6.4  3.0  2.8  2.4 
   Energy component 5.1  0.7  2.2  1.0 
   Excluding energy and food 5.1  3.1  2.5  2.3 
   Food component 11.7   2.3  4.1  2.6 
Sources: Federal Statistical Office, Federal Employment Agency, . Annual figures for 2024 to 2026 are Eurostat
Bundesbank projections.
 If calendar effects present.   Data as at 22 May 2024.   Private non-residential fixed capital formation.   As a 1 2 3 4
percentage of nominal . For 2023, current account data as at 11 April 2024.   In arithmetical terms, in percentage GDP 5
points. Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.   Domestic concept.   In millions of persons (Federal 6 7
Employment Agency definition).   As a percentage of the civilian labour force.   Internationally standardised as per  8 9 ILO
definition,  differentiation.   Unadjusted figures, monthly basis. Pursuant to the Bundesbank’s negotiated Eurostat 10
wage index.   Ratio of domestic compensation per employee to real  per employed person.   Harmonised Index 11 GDP 12
of Consumer Prices ( ), unadjusted figures. HICP

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 49Item 202312024 2025 2026
GDP  (real) − 0.2   0.2  1.0  1.6 
GDP  (real, calendar adjusted) 0.0  0.3  1.1  1.4 
Components of real GDP  
   Private consumption − 0.7   0.7  1.6  1.6 
   Memo item: Saving ratio 11.4   12.6   11.7   10.2  
   Government consumption − 1.5   1.0  1.2  1.8 
   Gross fixed capital formation − 0.7   − 0.6   0.9  2.9 
      Business investment2 0.6  − 2.1   0.5  2.2 
      Private housing construction investment − 3.4   − 1.9   − 0.1   2.4 
   Exports − 2.1   0.7  2.0  2.8 
   Imports − 3.4   0.2  3.1  3.7 
   Memo item: Current account balance3 5.9  7.5  7.3  7.1 
Contributions to  growth GDP4  
   Domestic final demand − 0.9   0.4  1.3  1.8 
   Changes in inventories 0.1  − 0.4   0.1  0.0 
   Exports − 1.1   0.3  0.9  1.3 
   Imports 1.6  − 0.1   − 1.3   − 1.5  
Labour market  
   Total number of hours worked5 0.4  0.1  0.7  0.5 
   Employed persons5 0.7  0.3  0.3  0.1 
   Unemployed persons6 2.6  2.7  2.6  2.5 
   Unemployment rate7 5.7  5.9  5.6  5.4 
   Memo item:  unemployment rateILO8 3.0  3.2  3.1  3.0 
Wages and wage costs  
   Negotiated wages9 4.0  5.9  2.7  3.1 
   Gross wages and salaries per employee 6.1  6.0  3.2  3.5 
   Compensation per employee 5.8  6.1  3.4  3.6 
   Real  per employed person GDP − 0.9   0.0  0.7  1.6 
   Unit labour costs10 6.7  6.1  2.7  2.0 
   Memo item:  deflator GDP 6.6  3.6  2.8  2.2 
   
Consumer prices11 6.0  2.8  2.7  2.2 Table 2.6: Key figures of the macroeconomic projection – non-calendar adjusted
Year-on-year percentage change

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 50   Excluding energy 6.4  3.0  2.8  2.4 
   Energy component 5.1  0.7  2.2  1.0 
   Excluding energy and food 5.1  3.1  2.5  2.3 
   Food component 11.7   2.3  4.1  2.6 
Sources: Federal Statistical Office, Federal Employment Agency, . Annual figures for 2024 to 2026 are Eurostat
Bundesbank projections.
 Data as at 22 May 2024.   Private non-residential fixed capital formation.   As a percentage of nominal . For 1 2 3 GDP
2023, current account data as at 11 April 2024.   In arithmetical terms, in percentage points. Discrepancies in the totals 4
are due to rounding.   Domestic concept. 6 In millions of persons (Federal Employment Agency definition).   As a 5 7
percentage of the civilian labour force.   Internationally standardised per  definition,  differentiation.   8 ILO Eurostat 9
Unadjusted figures, monthly basis. Pursuant to the Bundesbank’s negotiated wage index.  Ratio of domestic 10
compensation per employee to real  per employed person.   Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices ( ), GDP 11 HICP
unadjusted figures.

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 51List of references
Barrios, D., S. Russell and M. Andrews (2016), Bringing Home the Gold? A Review of the 
Economic Impact of Hosting Mega-Events,  Working Papers No 320, Center for CID
International Development at Harvard University.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024a), The German economy, Monthly Report, May 2024 . 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024b), Global and European setting, Monthly Report, May 2024 .
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024c), The economic impact of shipping disruptions in the Red 
Sea, Monthly Report, February 2024 .
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024d), Domestic investment barriers faced by German 
enterprises, Monthly Report, May 2024 .
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024e), The Maastricht debt of the  institutions and its fiscal EU
implications for Germany, Monthly Report, April 2024 .
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a), Falling inflation, but not yet time to sound the all-
clear – outlook for the German economy up to 2026, Monthly Report, December 2023, 
pp. 15‑35.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b), The plan to introduce a generational capital fund to 
ease pressures on the pension scheme’s finances, Monthly Report, November 2023, pp. 
79‑81.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019a), The impact of wages on prices in Germany: evidence 
from selected empirical analyses, Monthly Report, September 2019, pp. 15‑37.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b), The impact of the Climate Package on economic growth 
and inflation, Monthly Report, December 2019, pp. 29‑33.
European Central Bank (2024), Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections for the 
euro area, June 2024, Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area, 
June 2024 (europa.eu)
Gautier, E., C. Conflitti, L. Fadejeva, E. Gutiérrez, V. Jouvanceau, J.-O. Menz, A. Paulus, P. 
Roldan-Blanco and E. Wieland (2024), How price adjustment patterns change with 

Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 52higher inflation: recent evidence from euro area micro consumer price data, in L. 
Dedola, L. Henkel, C. Höynck, C. Osbat and S. Santoro, What does new micro price 
evidence tell us about inflation dynamics and monetary policy transmission?,  ECB
Economic Bulletin, Issue 3/2024.
German Chamber of Commerce and Industry (2023),  DIHK -Netzwerk-Industrie-
Umfrage 2023: Industriestandort Deutschland: Strukturschwächen beseitigen
info Institute (2024), German manufacturing sees threat to its competitiveness .

53An international 
comparison of the tax 
wedge on labour: the 
difference between 
pension contributions 
and taxes

An international comparison of the tax wedge on labour: the difference between pension 
contributions and taxes
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 54The tax wedge on labour – i.e. the burden of taxes and social security contributions on 
labour income – is a frequently discussed topic. For Germany, this tax wedge is 
relatively large by  standards. A large tax wedge reduces incentives to work, thus OECD
potentially exacerbating the challenges an economy faces from skilled labour 
shortages and demographic ageing. 
A closer look at the ’s tax wedge on labour, however, reveals a fairly mixed OECD
picture. Insofar as a higher pension contribution payment, say, results in a greater 
pension entitlement (contribution equivalence), that payment is more akin to an 
investment in a compulsory pension scheme because, while it reduces the insured 
person’s take-home pay, just like a tax, it also increases their pension entitlements. If 
that person factors this into their considerations, the pension contribution dampens 
their incentives to work to a lesser degree. A clear and reliable link between 
contributions and benefits is important in this regard. 
This article decomposes the labour tax wedge ratio into a retirement savings 
component and a tax component. It does so by determining the portion of the tax 
wedge ratio attributable to pension contributions that are closely linked to benefits 
(equivalent pension contributions) – this constitutes the retirement savings component. 
The remainder of the labour tax wedge ratio then represents the tax component.
In many countries, including Germany, the tax component of the tax wedge ratio is 
markedly smaller than the total tax wedge ratio. This is because the retirement savings 
component of the tax wedge ratio is substantial in most cases on account of the fact 
that equivalent pension contributions have considerable weight. On average across the 
countries analysed, these are estimated here at 15 percentage points. Germany ranks 
around average in this regard. The tax component of the tax wedge ratio is thus 
relatively high by international standards, just like the total tax wedge ratio. 
Equivalence-oriented pension contributions are estimated here based on  data OECD
using a schematic and highly simplified method. It would therefore be wrong to read 
too much into the quantitative results, and the method may be refined going forward. 
What the article does illustrate, though, is that the retirement savings component of 
the tax wedge is sizeable in many countries. Therefore, examining the total tax wedge 
ratio alone does not paint the full picture. This aspect merits greater attention in 
economic policy analyses.

An international comparison of the tax wedge on labour: the difference between pension 
contributions and taxes
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 551 Article overview
The OECD  reports data on tax wedges on labour, which attract a great deal of 
attention. In Germany, the tax wedge is relatively large (see )Much of the Chapter 2 . 
tax wedge is made up of equivalent pension contributions, i.e. pension contributions 
that are based on a close link between contributions and benefits. These pension 
contributions are often more akin to an investment in a compulsory pension scheme 
than a wage tax payment. Equivalent pension contributions are intended to dampen 
incentives to work to a lesser degree than taxes (see ). Cross-country Chapter 3
comparisons of tax wedges need to take this difference into account so that the tax 
component of the tax wedge can be captured in a more nuanced manner.
This article splits the OECD  labour tax wedge ratio into a tax component and a 
retirement savings component  by applying a simple schematic method (see 
)The starting point for this exercise is the tax wedges on labour reported by Chapter 4 . 
the  A schematic method is used here to decompose these tax wedges into two . OECD
components. These are, first, a retirement savings component of the pension 
contribution, i.e. the part of the pension contribution that grants old-age retirement 
benefits based on contribution equivalence, and, second, a tax component of the tax 
wedge ratio, which is calculated by deducting the retirement savings component from 
the total tax wedge ratio.  1) 
1 The German version of this article refers to the tax and retirement savings components of the tax wedge on 
labour as “steuernah” and “vorsorgenah” (literally, “tax-like” and “retirement savings-like”, respectively). This 
wording emphasises that the decomposition of the tax wedge is subject to considerable uncertainty (see also 
Chapter 4.1). However, for the sake of readability, the more straightforward terms “tax component” and 
“retirement savings component” are used in this English translation.

An international comparison of the tax wedge on labour: the difference between pension 
contributions and taxes
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 562 An international comparison of tax wedges on labour
2.1 Tax wedge ratios vary greatly
The OECD  calculates the tax wedge on labour income for different types of 
household, where the tax wedge is defined as tax and social security payments as a 
proportion of labour costs.  
Tax and social security payments  are defined by the  as the sum of the OECD
total personal income tax on labour income (hereinafter referred to as wage tax) 
and social security contributions paid by employees and employers minus cash 
benefits received. The amounts the OECD  records as tax and social security 
payments as well as cash transfers depend on the type of household in question.
Labour costs  consist of gross wages plus employer social security contributions.
Three types of household are analysed by the OECD  in greater detail:
(i) a single person earning the average national wage with no children; 
(ii) a couple  comprising one earner of the average national wage and one 
unemployed (or inactive) person with two children (hereinafter: four-person 
household);
(iii) a couple comprising two earners (one earning the national average wage and 
one earning 67 % thereof) with two children. 
The  also calculates tax wedges for other types of household (earning 67 %, OECD 2) 
 3) 
 4) 
2 The data presented in this article are taken from the 2022 tax wedges as reported in OECD (2024). The figures 
for 2023 have already been reported by the OECD, but other variables needed for this exercise are not yet 
available (one notable absence are the data needed to estimate the equivalent components of pension 
contributions). Overall, however, the situation is unlikely to have changed significantly in 2023.
3 The OECD applies only standard deductions. In the case of wage taxes in Germany, these include employees’ 
standard deduction for income-related expenses and deductible social security contributions, for example. As 
regards social security benefits in Germany, child benefits and child tax allowances are taken into account for 
families with children; see OECD (2023a), pp. 322 f.
4 The terms “couples” and “children” are defined here within the meaning of the legislation governing taxes and 
social security contributions. In Germany, they thus refer to married couples and partnerships with children 
up to a certain age and income level.

An international comparison of the tax wedge on labour: the difference between pension 
contributions and taxes
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 57100 % and 167 % of the average wage, single persons and couples, with and 
without children).
In OECD  comparisons, Germany ranks as a country with a relatively large tax 
wedge. 
A single person earning the average wage with no children in Germany has 
the second-largest tax wedge behind Belgium  (see Chart 3.1). At 48½%, the 
German tax wedge significantly exceeds the 41½% average of the  countries OECD
under review.  Germany is ranked similarly for single persons earning less than 
the average wage as well as for single parents. However, by cross-country 
standards, it ranks somewhat better in the category of “single person earning 
more than the average wage with no children”, not least because of the 
contribution assessment ceiling ( ) in the statutory Beitragsbemessungsgrenze
healthcare and social long-term care insurance schemes.
For the four-person household with one person earning the average wage and 
two children as described above (ii), the tax wedge in Germany is significantly 
smaller in absolute terms and somewhat smaller in relative terms  (see also 
Chart 3.1). In Germany, the practice of taxing married couples jointly under an 
income-splitting system, child benefits and contribution-free health insurance for 
the inactive person provide considerable relief. For this type of household, five 
countries have a larger tax wedge than Germany’s 33½%, with Germany ranking 
closer to the average of 29½%. The tax wedge is largest in France, Finland and 
Belgium. 
However, according to the cross-country comparison, the tax wedge in 
Germany is large again for four-person households with two earners (iii).  If 
one person in the household earns the average wage and the other earns 67 % of 
the average, Germany’s tax wedge amounts to 41½%, which is second only to 
Belgium. The tax wedge is greater than for household type (ii) because the couple 
benefits less from the income-splitting system, they have to pay an additional 
pension contribution, and the second person in the household no longer enjoys 
contribution-free health insurance under the principal earner’s insurance cover. 
The tax wedge in Germany for this type of household is similar to the tax wedges 
for single persons with no children in the other countries under review. For this 
reason, this household type is not analysed separately in the following. 5) 
5 These only include the countries for which it was possible to adjust the tax wedge for pension contributions or 
countries that do not collect pension contributions (see also the supplementary information presenting the 
methodology at the end of this article).

An international comparison of the tax wedge on labour: the difference between pension 
contributions and taxes
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 58When macroeconomic aggregates, rather than certain types of household, are 
compared to one another, Germany still counts among the countries with larger tax 
wedges. Germany does fare better in terms of its ranking, though (see Chart 3.2)  .
According to the European Commission, Germany’s implicit tax on labour income as a 
percentage of total compensation of employees is slightly above the middle of the 
table, ranking eighth. This macroeconomic indicator is not calculated by the  In . OECD
methodological terms, it differs from the calculations presented above with regard to 
the components that it takes into account.  In addition, macroeconomic statistics 
involve different factors to the selected  household types. For one thing, the OECD
European Commission’s indicator is income-weighted across all households. For 
another, special tax deductions are also fed into the indicator, including the deduction 
options that are not captured in the standardised types of household and that are 
attached to certain conditions. The analyses presented below do not examine the 
 6) 
6 This metric includes the sum of all direct and indirect taxes on labour income as well as the social contribution 
payments of employees and employers (numerator). These are expressed as a proportion of compensation of 
employees (denominator). Unlike with the OECD metrics, social benefits such as child benefits are not 
deducted. Indirect taxes on labour income are payroll taxes payable by the employer. These exist in some EU 
countries.

An international comparison of the tax wedge on labour: the difference between pension 
contributions and taxes
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 59macroeconomic indicator in any further detail. One reason is that the national accounts 
do not disaggregate social contributions by type of insurance for every country, which 
would be necessary for that exercise to work. In addition, as the  country OECD
comparisons often attract particular public attention, this article will focus on the  OECD
data.
2.2 Structure of tax wedge differs significantly between countries
The composition of the tax wedge in taxes and social security contributions differs 
significantly between the countries (see Chart 3.3)  This is due, not least, to historical .
reasons. For example, Anglo-Saxon and Scandinavian countries, in particular, primarily 
finance their social security benefits through taxes. Other European countries, by 
contrast, finance their social security benefits to a greater extent via social security 
funds. Supplementary private pension products are also regulated and incentivised 
differently from country to country. However, these are not included in the tax wedge 
and are therefore not considered here.
Germany finances its social security system through social security contributions to 
a significantly higher degree than average.  The burden of social contributions for a 


An international comparison of the tax wedge on labour: the difference between pension 
contributions and taxes
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 60single person in Germany earning an average income is 33½%, which is markedly 
above the average of 27½% for the  countries under review. The burden of wage OECD
taxes in Germany, at 15 %, is more in the middle of the range and less significantly 
above the  average of 14 %. OECD


An international comparison of the tax wedge on labour: the difference between pension 
contributions and taxes
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 613 Social security contributions with a retirement 
savings component differ from wage taxes
Some portions of social security contributions are akin to a wage tax, and the 
negative effect of wage taxes on individual incentives to work has been plausibly 
demonstrated.  For individual taxpayers, paying wage taxes does not directly result in 
individual benefits. To a certain degree, also applies to some social security this 
contributions. In Germany, for example, statutory health insurance and social long-
term care insurance are more akin to a tax for contributors, with the insurance benefits 
being independent of the amount of contribution payments – except in the case of sick 
pay. As contributions increase with rising wages up to the contribution assessment 
ceiling, this reduces the incentives to earn more (for example by working longer hours).
 
By contrast, other social security contributions are more akin to investments in 
compulsory savings schemes. They should have less of a negative impact on 
incentives to work.  This is the case if contributors can expect the amount of benefits 
they receive to be proportional to the size of their contributions. For contributions to  
the statutory pension and unemployment insurance schemes, it is often the retirement 
savings and insurance aspects that dominate. Higher contributions increase  
entitlements to pension payments and wage replacement benefits in the event of  7) 
 8) 
 9) 
7 See, for example, Chetty et al. (2011) and Keane (2011). For women, a clear and significant labour market 
response to changes in wage taxes is found in most cases. For men, the response is usually less pronounced. 
Overall, however, the incentives to work are likely to be macroeconomically significant; see, for example, 
Rogerson (2024).
8 For more information on dealing with the contribution assessment ceiling, see also the supplementary 
information presenting the methodology at the end of this article. Furthermore, in a case such as Germany, 
the picture may also change abruptly depending on income: if an insured person’s income exceeds the 
threshold for opting out of the statutory health insurance scheme, they may switch to private health and long-
term care insurance. In Germany, however, only around one-tenth of employed persons are privately insured, 
the majority of whom have civil servant status.
9 Disney (2004) and French et al. (2022) demonstrate that the design of pension systems and pension 
contributions influences the elasticity of the labour supply: where pension contributions are equivalence 
oriented (i.e. where there is a close link between contributions and benefits), pension contributions affect the 
labour supply to a lesser degree than where they are not.

An international comparison of the tax wedge on labour: the difference between pension 
contributions and taxes
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 62unemployment (contribution equivalence). However, in order for this to be factored 
into the insured persons’ decision-making process, they need to actually be aware of 
these (additional) entitlements and consider them to be reliable; they need to regard 
the greater entitlements as a useful form of retirement savings or insurance. 

An international comparison of the tax wedge on labour: the difference between pension 
contributions and taxes
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 634 Tax component of the total tax wedge: an 
approximation
4.1 Overview of method and limitations
The tax wedge ratios of the individual countries are broken down into the two 
aforementioned components.  The first is the savings component, which is more akin 
to an investment in an obligatory pension scheme than to a tax. The second is the tax 
component of the tax wedge.
The approach to the decomposition is based on simplifying assumptions.  
First, for the retirement savings component, only pension contributions are 
taken into account.  Pension contributions usually comprise a fairly significant 
share of the tax wedge, amounting to 16 % of labour costs on average in the 
countries under review and 15½% in Germany.  In some other major  EU
countries, they account for a considerably larger share still (for example, 25 % in 
Italy). By contrast, contributions to unemployment insurance schemes are 
significantly lower, and less  data are available for categorisation purposes. OECD
For these reasons, this article focuses on equivalent pension contributions when 
examining the retirement savings component. This is likely to already be a major 
step towards better comparability. In order to provide a more detailed picture, 
future studies could, however, include the respective parts of the other branches 
of social security. 
Second, the retirement savings component of pension contributions is 
approximated in simplified form by the extent to which pension entitlements 
increase with contribution payments, i.e. the extent to which they are 
contribution-equivalent.  Specifically, the retirement savings component of  10) 
 11) 
10 Pension contributions are shown here as a percentage of labour costs, as the latter form the denominator of 
the tax wedge. In Germany, pension contributions are usually reported as a percentage of gross wages 
(18.6 %).
11 This ignores, amongst other things, the fact that, in many cases, certain minimum contribution periods must 
be fulfilled in order to acquire any pension entitlement at all.

An international comparison of the tax wedge on labour: the difference between pension 
contributions and taxes
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 64pension contributions is derived schematically from how the gross replacement 
rate varies with the wage level (see also the supplementary information 
). The gross replacement rate is the level of pension presenting the methodology
payments received by pensioners relative to their final gross wages. Three wage 
levels are considered: half the average wage, the average wage, and one-and-a-
half times the average wage. If the gross replacement rate is the same for all 
wage levels, full contribution equivalence is assumed. Pension contributions are 
then regarded as a retirement savings component in full. If, by contrast, the gross 
replacement rate is higher for low incomes than for high incomes, for example, 
there is weak contribution equivalence. The non-equivalence-oriented part is then 
factored out of the pension contributions and captured in the tax component of 
the tax wedge.
The calculations here are based on OECD  data on pension contribution rates and 
gross replacement rates.  The  calculates the gross replacement rates for a OECD
person entering the labour market at the age of 22 in 2022. This person works up to 
the applicable statutory retirement age and always earns the average income – or the 
higher or lower income of their respective type of household. In the case of Germany, 
for instance, this means that additional pension credit for periods of particularly low 
income, such as during training or education, are ignored. Where pension reforms 
were sufficiently specified at the time of calculation, the  has taken them into OECD
account. The macroeconomic assumptions necessary to calculate future pension 
entitlements (such as wage growth) are uniform across all countries. Mortality rates, by 
contrast, are country-specific.
All in all, the quantitative results should be interpreted with caution.  This article 
contributes to a more differentiated classification of tax wedge ratios. However, the 
methodology has constraints and limitations. For example, in the simplified method, 
pension contributions are decomposed into a tax component and a retirement savings 
component based solely on the extent to which they are equivalence oriented. The 
approach does not, for instance, take account of the potential returns that may be  12) 
 13) 12 This also applies in view of a broader discussion about Germany as a location of business and investment 
overall. In this context, the tax wedge is an important element, but only one sub-aspect. It should be borne in 
mind that higher tax revenues finance an increased level of government services, which can in turn 
strengthen the country as a location of business.

An international comparison of the tax wedge on labour: the difference between pension 
contributions and taxes
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 65generated by mandatory pension contributions.  Returns perceived as too low will 
increase the tax character of these contributions.  An important role is also played by 
the extent to which contributors trust the pension system. Crucial factors here are the 
sustainability and credibility of the pension system. Overall, individual insured persons 
are likely to have very different perceptions of its advantages. For example, there will 
be employees with lower retirement savings requirements, for example if they have 
Furthermore, lower life expectancy or other means of financing their retirement . 
preferences regarding current consumption or alternative forms of savings will 
presumably not generally align entirely with the statutory pension insurance 
scheme – for example, if insured persons wish to purchase real estate as part of their 
retirement provisions.  As far as incentives to work are concerned, the way pension 
The number of years of benefits interact with any basic allowance is also significant. 
contributions that are required to acquire any entitlement at all is also important. Such 
additional aspects were not able to be included with the method used here. However, 
they could potentially be taken into account in future in-depth analyses, for example in 
international comparisons conducted, say, by international organisations.
4.2 Results
The OECD  data show that the gross replacement rates of the pension systems in 
individual countries vary considerably in some cases  (see Charts 3.4 and 3.5 for 
selected European countries and the United States) .  13) 
 14) 
13 In the case of pay-as-you-go pension insurance schemes, macroeconomic and demographic developments in 
a country are of crucial importance. In the German pay-as-you-go system, the return on the pension insurance 
scheme is largely influenced by wage developments. As a result of demographic developments, contribution 
rates are likely to rise significantly in the future and the return on future contribution payments is likely to 
decline. Long-term calculations often assume wage growth rates of 3 %. In this case, it is plausible that the 
individual cohorts will continue to generate positive real returns on average in the pension insurance scheme 
in the future. Nevertheless, yields will vary greatly depending on individual insurance histories. In terms of the 
benefits of the German pension insurance scheme, it should also be noted that it provides not only old-age 
pensions, but also other benefits, such as pensions for those with reduced earning capacity and for surviving 
dependants. A number of non-contributory benefits (known as non-insurance-related benefits) are also 
provided. The Federal Government injects substantial tax-financed federal funds into the pension insurance 
scheme.
14 Conversely, a system funded in a tax-like manner but with high yields can at least provide an incentive to 
participate in the system at all; there is thus an incentive to pursue employment subject to pension insurance 
contributions. However, it may then seem unattractive to increase employment.

An international comparison of the tax wedge on labour: the difference between pension 
contributions and taxes
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 66


An international comparison of the tax wedge on labour: the difference between pension 
contributions and taxes
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 67In most cases, however, the approach reveals large retirement savings components 
in pension contributions (see Chart 3.6) In other words, the tax component of pension . 
contributions in many countries is considered to be low. Pension contributions in the 
German system are comprised largely of the retirement savings component, too. 


An international comparison of the tax wedge on labour: the difference between pension 
contributions and taxes
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 68Given the mostly large retirement savings component of pension contributions, the 
tax component of the tax wedge is significantly smaller than the total tax wedge in 
many countries – the ranking of the countries is also markedly different in some 
cases  (see Chart 3.7 and Chart 3.8) On average across the countries under review, the . 
tax component of the tax wedge is 15 percentage points lower than the total tax wedge 
(not weighted). It thus falls from 41½% to 26½% for single persons and from 29½% to 
14½% for four-person households with one earner.  In Germany, the tax component 
of the tax wedge is also 15 percentage points lower than the total tax wedge ratio. 
Germany’s cross-country ranking with regard to the tax component of its tax wedge 
therefore also remains relatively high. 
 15) 
15 For four-person households, the same retirement savings component of pension contributions was deducted 
as for single persons.

An international comparison of the tax wedge on labour: the difference between pension 
contributions and taxes
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 69


An international comparison of the tax wedge on labour: the difference between pension 
contributions and taxes
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 70


An international comparison of the tax wedge on labour: the difference between pension 
contributions and taxes
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 715 Concluding remarks
The tax wedge on labour is an important indicator, not least in terms of individual 
incentives to work.  For example, wage taxes reduce the incentives to take up 
employment, increase working hours, or seek a better-paid job by means of higher 
qualification. 
In order to classify the tax wedge as adequately as possible, account would need to 
be taken of the fact that parts of social security contributions can be viewed more 
as mandatory provisions. Such contributions differ from wage taxes and should 
have less of a negative impact on incentives to work.  If contributions to a pension 
insurance scheme are closely linked to benefits based on contribution equivalence, 
they are more akin to investments in a compulsory pension scheme. Although this 
initially reduces take-home pay, larger contributions grant entitlement to higher 
benefits in the future. 
In most countries, the tax components of tax wedges without equivalent pension 
contributions are significantly smaller than the total tax wedge.  Equivalent pension 
contributions are important in many countries. On the basis of a simple schematic 
method, this article estimates that, on average across the  countries under OECD
review, old-age provision based on contribution equivalence corresponds to 15 
percentage points of the total tax wedge ratio. The tax component of the tax wedge 
ratio is thus 26½% for single persons (total tax wedge ratio: 41½%) and 14½% for 
couples with a single earner and children (total tax wedge ratio: 29½%). 
In Germany, too, the tax component of the tax wedge ratio is significantly smaller 
than the total tax wedge ratio.  The gap roughly corresponds to the average of the 
countries under review. Here, the tax component of the tax wedge ratio and the total 
tax wedge ratio are above average by international standards. This particularly applies 
to single persons and households with two earners. For multi-person households with 
one earner, Germany’s position in the ranking is more favourable. 
A nuanced analysis of tax wedge ratios makes an important contribution to 
enabling better interpretation of tax wedges.  This applies both to purely national 
analyses as well as to international comparisons. As described above, the tax 
components of the tax wedge ratios for each country and across countries are 
markedly different from the total tax wedge ratios in some cases.

An international comparison of the tax wedge on labour: the difference between pension 
contributions and taxes
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 72In this context, particularly given the highly simplified approach, the quantitative 
results presented here should be interpreted with great caution.  Future analyses 
could further improve the informative value of tax wedge ratios. For instance, 
international organisations could use their comparative advantage and break down the 
ratios in more detail when carrying out comparative analyses. Notably, the degree of 
contribution equivalence in the calculations presented here is measured in a simplified 
manner using the coefficient of variation for three levels of earnings. Irrespective of 
these simplifications, contribution equivalence is also only an imperfect measure of the 
retirement savings component. Beyond the aspect of contribution equivalence, further 
analysis could, for example, take a closer look at what returns can be expected from 
pension systems. In addition, other branches of social security could be included in the 
analysis.
Insured persons’ confidence in the long-term sustainability of the pension system is 
crucial  – it is necessary for pension contributions to actually be perceived as retirement 
provision rather than tax. Against this backdrop, policymakers are well advised to 
ensure that the system is financially sustainable and to evidence this using long-term 
projections. Insured persons should also be provided with enough information on their 
future entitlements and how they relate to their contributions. For countries with pay-
as-you-go systems, a sound macroeconomic path is particularly important. The 
macroeconomic path is the main determinant of the amount of pension entitlements 
granted by contributions. Economic and fiscal policymakers are thus also called upon to 
ensure favourable business conditions and growth prospects in their countries.

An international comparison of the tax wedge on labour: the difference between pension 
contributions and taxes
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 73Supplementary information
Methodological information on tax wedge adjustment
In this article, the tax wedge ratio is broken down into a retirement savings 
component and a tax component. This is based on a simple approximation of the tax 
component in the pension contribution, which works well for the purposes of drawing 
cross-country comparisons.  
First, it needs to be determined whether the contribution is proportional to 
wages – because, taking this schematic approach, only proportional contributions 
can be broken down into tax and retirement savings components (see below). 
In the next step, the normalised coefficient of variation for gross pension 
replacement rates  is calculated along the earnings distribution (half of average 
earnings, average earnings and one-and-a-half times average earnings). The 
gross pension replacement rate is an individual’s pension entitlement relative to 
their final gross earnings. The normalised coefficient of variation thus indicates 
the level of dispersion of gross pension replacement rates relative to their mean. 
It takes account of the fact that, for some countries, only two gross pension 
replacement rates can be included in the calculation (see below), and it only takes 
values between zero and one. 
The normalised coefficient of variation multiplied by the pension contribution 
yields the tax component of the pension contribution. 
The rest of the pension contribution is interpreted as equivalent – and thus as the 
retirement savings component. 
The method applied here is a simple, pragmatic approach. This means that it does 
have its limitations. Using the normalised coefficient of variation to estimate the tax 
component is highly simplistic.  For example, this approach is limited in that it cannot 
classify progressive and degressive contributions as tax or mandatory retirement 
saving. Therefore, the article only takes into account countries with a contribution rate 
that is applied proportionally in the range of half to one-and-a-half times average 
earnings or that does not contain a pension contribution (Denmark). Methodological 
exceptions are made for Belgium, France and Sweden (see below). Furthermore, the 
pension contribution is broken down into the tax and retirement savings components 
solely on the basis of its equivalence (see Chapter 4.1 for further information). The [1]
[2]

An international comparison of the tax wedge on labour: the difference between pension 
contributions and taxes
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 74approach does not, for instance, take any account of the potential returns generated by 
mandatory retirement saving. Furthermore, as far as incentives to work are concerned, 
for example, factors such as the way in which pension benefits under the statutory 
pension insurance scheme interact with any basic allowance are significant. 
The calculations are based on the latest available OECD  data on pension 
contribution rates and gross pension replacement rates.  The  calculates the OECD
gross pension replacement rates for a person who enters the labour market in 2022 at 
the age of 22, works up to the statutory retirement age and has consistently average 
earnings. Where pension reforms were sufficiently specified at the time of calculation, 
the  has taken these into account. Meanwhile, the planned extension of the OECD
minimum threshold for the replacement rate ( ) in the German Versorgungsniveau
statutory pension scheme has not been taken into account. The  labour tax OECD
wedge does not include contributions for government-organised or subsidised 
supplementary private pensions. For this reason, the approach likewise takes into 
account only the fundamental pension systems (in Germany, for example, only the 
statutory pension insurance scheme). The contribution rules for private pension 
schemes often vary by occupation. In addition, they do not usually contain any tax 
elements. 
Country selection is restricted by various factors.  The 22  countries that are also OECD
 Member States serve as the starting point. However, for various reasons, some of EU
those countries could not be factored into the analysis. For example, the  does OECD
not report a pension contribution for Ireland and Spain, but rather only a social security 
contribution. The Netherlands cannot be included because the contribution assessment 
ceiling in the state pension scheme is very low (0.62 times average earnings). By 
contrast, Denmark can be included: it finances its basic pension via taxes alone, 
meaning that the tax wedge ratio does not need to be adjusted for an equivalent 
pension contribution. In addition, the study also includes the United States for 
comparative purposes.
In order to include Belgium, France and Sweden, only two earnings levels are 
included for these countries.  For most of the countries, the earnings levels taken into 
account here (up to one-and-a-half times average earnings) are below the contribution 
assessment ceilings.  The exceptions are France, Belgium and Sweden, which have 
contribution assessment ceilings of 0.99 times, 1.29 times and 1.08 times average 
earnings. As a result, only average earnings and half of average earnings are included 
in the calculation of the retirement savings component for these countries. In Finland, 
the pension contribution is also age-dependent – which is not specifically addressed in 
the analysis. 
 [3]

An international comparison of the tax wedge on labour: the difference between pension 
contributions and taxes
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 751.  
2.  
3.  The approach is based on Disney (2004).
The gross pension replacement rate is a commonly used indicator for international comparisons. It divides 
gross pension entitlement by gross pre-retirement earnings. By contrast, the focus in Germany's pension 
debate is on its nationally defined replacement rate ( ), which is a standardised Versorgungsniveau
benchmark used to determine the amount paid to retirees under the statutory pension insurance scheme. 
It currently stands at 48 %. This replacement rate is the pension in relation to wages after social security 
contributions but before tax. It reflects the ratio of the standard pension (with average earnings over 45 
years of contributions) to average earnings subject to compulsory contributions to the statutory pension 
insurance scheme.
OECD  (2023b) presents gross pension replacement rates for average earnings and for half and two times 
average earnings. However, in many countries, two times average earnings is above the contribution 
assessment ceiling. In view of this, the gross pension replacement rates at one-and-a-half times average 
earnings are considered in this article. These were kindly supplied by the  on request. OECD

An international comparison of the tax wedge on labour: the difference between pension 
contributions and taxes
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – June 2024 76List of references
Chetty, R., A. Guren, D. Manoli and A. Weber (2011), Are Micro and Macro Labor Supply 
Elasticities Consistent? A Review of Evidence on the Intensive and Extensive Margins, 
American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, Vol. 101, No 3, pp. 471‑475.
Disney, R. (2004), Are contributions to public pension programmes a tax on 
employment? Economic Policy, July 2004, pp. 268‑311.
European Commission (2024), Taxation trends, Data on Taxation Trends – European 
Commission (europa.eu)
French, E., A. Lindner, C. O’Dea and T. Zawisza (2022), Labor supply and the pension 
contribution link,  Working Paper No 30184.  NBER
Keane, M. P. (2011), Labor Supply and Taxes: A survey, Journal of Economic Literature, 
Vol. 49, No 4, pp. 961‑1075.
OECD  (2024), Taxing Wages 2024.
OECD  (2023a), Taxing Wages 2023.
OECD  (2023b), Pensions at a Glance 2023.
Rogerson, R. (2024), Why Labour Supply Matters for Macroeconomics, Journal of 
Economic Perspectives, Vol. 38, No 2, pp. 137‑158.

Statistical  
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
024 
1• June 2

Contents
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5•
2. External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5•
3. General economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8•
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10•
3. Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16•
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche 
Bundes  bank) in Germany  .............................................................................................  20•
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24•
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26•
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28•
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30•
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32•
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34•
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36•
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36•
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38•
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38•
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39•
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
2• 024  June 2

V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42•
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42•
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest  ....................................................................  43•
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43•
3. Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43•
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48•
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49•
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50•
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51•
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52•
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52•
5. Yields on German securities  .........................................................................................  53•
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53•
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54•
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55•
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56•
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57•
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  .. 58•
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  ........................................................................................................  58•
3. General government: budgetary development  .............................................................  59•
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59•
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60•
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
024 
3• June 2

7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61•
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ....... 61•
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62•
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62•
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63•
12. Maastricht debt by creditor  .........................................................................................  63•
13. Maastricht debt by instrument .....................................................................................  64•
14. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category  ............................  65•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  66•
2. Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  67•
3. Orders received by industry  .........................................................................................  68•
4. Orders received by construction  ..................................................................................  69•
5. Retail trade turnover  ....................................................................................................  69•
6. Labour market  .............................................................................................................  70•
7. Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  71•
8. Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  72•
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  72•
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  73•
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  74•
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  75•
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  76•
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  77•
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ................................  78•
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............  78•
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  79•
7. External position of the Bundesbank ............................................................................  80•
8. External positions of enterprises  ..................................................................................  81•
9. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  82•
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage of 
Economic   and Monetary Union  ...................................................................................  82•
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  83•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
4•  024  June 2

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
5•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
M3 3
M1 M23-month
moving average
(centred)MFI lending,
totalMFI lending to
enterprises
and
householdsMonetary
capital
formation  4 €STR  5,6Yield on Euro-
pean govern-
ment bonds
outstanding  7
Period Annual percentage change % p.a. as a monthly average
2022 Sep. 5.2 5.9 5.9 5.6 5.5 5.7 0.0 0.36 2.6
Oct. 3.5 5.0 4.9 5.1 5.1 5.3 – 0.4 0.66 3.0
Nov. 2.1 4.5 4.6 4.4 4.8 5.2 0.2 1.37 2.7
Dec. 0.2 3.4 3.8 3.8 3.9 4.4 0.9 1.57 2.8
2023 Jan. – 1.3 2.5 3.0 3.1 3.0 3.7 1.6 1.90 2.9
Feb. – 3.1 1.7 2.5 2.5 2.6 3.3 2.1 2.28 3.0
Mar. – 4.7 1.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.9 2.5 2.57 3.1
Apr. – 5.7 0.5 1.4 1.5 1.4 2.4 2.6 2.90 3.0
May – 7.0 – 0.1 0.9 0.9 0.9 2.3 3.4 3.08 3.0
June – 8.0 – 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.4 1.6 3.6 3.24 3.0
July – 9.1 – 1.4 – 0.4 – 0.4 0.1 1.3 4.1 3.40 3.1
Aug. – 10.4 – 2.4 – 1.3 – 0.9 – 0.1 0.7 4.5 3.64 3.2
Sep. – 9.9 – 2.2 – 1.2 – 1.2 – 0.4 0.4 4.9 3.75 3.3
Oct. – 10.0 – 2.2 – 1.0 – 1.0 – 0.5 0.4 5.5 3.90 3.5
Nov. – 9.5 – 1.9 – 0.9 – 0.6 – 0.7 0.2 5.3 3.90 3.3
Dec. – 8.5 – 0.9 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.4 0.4 4.8 3.90 2.7
2024 Jan. – 8.6 – 1.1 0.1 0.2 – 0.4 0.4 5.2 3.90 2.8
Feb. – 7.8 – 0.6 0.4 0.5 – 0.3 0.8 5.1 3.91 2.9
Mar. – 6.6 – 0.2 0.9 0.8 – 0.2 0.8 5.2 3.91 2.9
Apr. – 6.0 0.0 1.3 ... 0.0 0.8 5.1 3.91 3.0
May ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3.91 3.0
1 Source: ECB.  2 Seasonally adjusted.  3 Excluding money market fund shares/units,
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by
non-euro area residents.  4 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs.  5 EuroShort-Term Rate.  6 See also footnotes to Table VI.3, p. 43●. 7 GDP-weighted yield on
ten-year government bonds. Countries included: DE, FR, NL, BE, AT, FI, IE, PT, ES, IT,
GR, SK, CY, SI.
2. External transactions and positions *
Selected items of the euro area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate  3
Balanceof which:
Goods BalanceDirect
investmentPortfolio
investmentFinancial
derivatives  2Other
investmentReserve
assetsReference
rate 
vis-á-vis the
US dollar Nominal Real  4
Period € million EUR 1 = USD ... Q1 1999 = 100
2022 Sep. – 5,903 –13,382 –33,802 +83,390 –167,500 +12,073 +34,765 + 3,470 0.9904 93.9 89.8
Oct. –14,074 – 7,974 +22,498 +10,511 –17,499 + 2,843 +22,721 + 3,923 0.9826 94.5 91.3
Nov. + 7,691 + 7,851 –13,013 – 6,329 –27,431 + 4,365 +15,867 + 515 1.0201 95.7 92.3
Dec. +17,079 +10,884 +42,550 +26,422 +50,066 – 7,072 –31,671 + 4,805 1.0589 96.8 92.6
2023 Jan. –11,816 –13,911 +16,242 – 8,544 +31,648 – 3,361 + 5,138 – 8,639 1.0769 97.1 92.8
Feb. +10,729 +21,047 –11,655 +29,570 –26,077 +10,438 –14,240 –11,347 1.0715 97.0 93.1
Mar. +27,023 +39,637 +28,775 +13,371 –102,889 – 1,615 +118,449 + 1,460 1.0706 97.3 93.3
Apr. + 5,460 + 6,403 –14,491 –32,055 +73,747 – 1,561 –52,756 – 1,866 1.0968 98.4 94.2
May – 8,296 +15,391 –16,231 –58,189 +47,538 + 6,963 –13,898 + 1,356 1.0868 98.0 93.6
June +32,796 +31,805 +70,825 +82,945 –39,125 –10,385 +34,998 + 2,393 1.0840 98.2 93.8
July +29,864 +21,967 +39,709 –23,381 +49,529 – 8,619 +21,776 + 404 1.1058 99.2 94.9
Aug. +28,568 +21,185 +11,981 + 7,830 – 7,778 + 3,297 + 7,323 + 1,310 1.0909 99.0 95.0
Sep. +37,096 +27,781 +43,672 +24,359 –59,905 + 2,653 +80,434 – 3,868 1.0684 98.5 94.6
Oct. +14,203 +13,651 +33,649 + 1,543 – 7,999 +17,265 +19,300 + 3,539 1.0563 98.0 94.1
Nov. +30,555 +32,488 +37,961 + 2,343 +45,021 + 1,279 –12,059 + 1,378 1.0808 98.7 94.6
Dec. +43,615 +28,387 +26,194 –13,801 –88,233 + 5,048 +121,700 + 1,479 1.0903 98.2 93.9
2024 Jan. +24,557 +30,844 + 5,531 + 3,026 –68,312 +15,574 +54,416 + 826 1.0905 98.4 p 94.4
Feb. +31,118 +40,210 + 8,474 +31,811 –11,190 +13,787 –26,801 + 867 1.0795 98.1 p 94.2
Mar. +44,533 +41,545 +64,533 +10,098 +11,009 – 5,582 +49,526 – 518 1.0872 98.8 p 94.8
Apr. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0728 98.6 p 94.6
May ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0812 98.9 p 94.8
see also Tables XII. 9 and 11, pp. 82●/ 83●.  2 Including employee stock options.
3 Bundesbank calculation. Vis-á-vis the currencies of the extended EER group oftranding partners (fixed composition).  4 Based on consumer price indices.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
6•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
3. General economic indicators
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Croatia Latvia
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
2021 5.9 6.9 3.2 7.2 2.8 6.4 8.4 15.1 8.3 13.0 6.7
2022 3.4 3.0 1.8 –0.5 1.3 2.5 5.6 9.4 4.0 7.0 3.0
2023 0.5 1.4 –0.2 –3.0 –1.0 0.7 2.0 –3.2 0.9 3.1 –0.3
2022 Q4 1.9 1.4 0.2 –4.2 –0.9 0.4 3.7 10.2 1.6 3.3 1.3
2023 Q1 1.3 1.7 0.5 –3.9 0.2 1.3 2.1 2.7 2.5 2.9 0.7
Q2 0.6 1.3 –0.3 –2.7 –0.7 0.9 3.0 –0.3 0.4 3.8 –0.6
Q3 0.2 1.3 –0.5 –2.8 –1.8 0.5 1.9 –5.8 0.4 1.4 –0.6
Q4 0.2 1.2 –0.4 –2.6 –1.7 1.0 1.1 –8.7 0.5 4.4 –0.5
2024 Q1 0.4 1.3 –0.9 –2.3 –1.5 1.1 1.9 –6.5 0.7 3.9 0.1
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
2021 8.8 16.8 4.6 12.8 4.3 5.5 10.4 28.3 12.3 6.3 6.6
2022 2.2 –0.7 –0.3 –2.3 4.0 –0.0 2.5 18.9 0.3 1.6 0.8
2023 –2.2 –5.4 –1.9 –8.8 –2.4 0.5 2.3 –7.2 –2.1 –0.1 –2.8
2022 Q4 1.9 –0.2 –0.7 –10.4 –0.4 –1.2 –1.6 29.8 –2.3 –1.4 –1.2
2023 Q1 0.8 –2.9 0.9 –7.9 0.3 –1.0 2.3 7.8 –0.7 –1.7 –4.3
Q2 –0.9 –4.3 –0.4 –12.9 –3.8 1.1 1.2 4.2 –3.5 0.1 –7.2
Q3 –4.8 –6.9 –3.5 –9.8 –2.8 0.4 –0.2 –21.6 –2.5 –0.4 0.5
Q4 –4.0 –7.4 –4.5 –4.3 –3.3 1.6 6.0 –12.8 –1.5 1.6 –0.1
2024 Q1 –4.7 –6.6 p–5.5 –7.2 –3.1 0.2 3.6 –19.4 –3.4 –4.0 –0.2
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
2021 81.5 80.1 84.9 78.1 81.2 81.1 75.6 78.0 77.0 75.0 75.3
2022 82.2 79.1 85.2 71.7 80.9 81.8 75.9 79.8 79.0 77.0 75.0
2023 80.6 75.7 83.4 67.3 76.6 81.2 75.2 ... 77.5 77.2 72.8
2023 Q1 81.5 76.7 84.6 71.4 79.0 81.0 74.8 79.2 78.2 77.5 72.7
Q2 81.3 77.2 84.2 70.8 76.4 82.0 73.7 ... 78.0 78.3 73.7
Q3 80.1 75.0 82.9 62.5 77.4 80.6 76.3 ... 77.4 78.2 72.6
Q4 79.6 73.9 81.9 64.6 73.6 81.3 75.9 ... 76.5 74.8 72.3
2024 Q1 79.2 74.0 81.3 65.7 73.3 80.9 73.5 ... 75.5 76.0 71.4
Q2 78.9 74.5 80.3 66.0 74.6 80.6 81.1 ... 76.0 74.3 73.0
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
2021 7.8 e 6.3 3.6 e 6.2 e 7.7 e 7.9 e 14.8 e 6.3 e 9.5 e 7.6 e 7.6
2022 6.7 e 5.5 p 3.1 e 5.6 e 6.8 e 7.3 e 12.5 e 4.5 e 8.1 e 6.8 e 6.9
2023 6.6 e 5.5 p 3.0 e 6.4 e 7.2 e 7.3 e 11.1 e 4.3 e 7.7 e 6.1 e 6.5
2023 Dec. 6.5 5.6 3.1 6.9 7.6 7.5 10.7 4.5 7.2 5.7 7.1
2024 Jan. 6.5 5.6 3.2 7.6 7.7 7.5 11.3 4.5 7.2 5.6 6.9
Feb. 6.5 5.7 3.2 7.8 7.7 7.4 11.6 4.1 7.3 5.5 6.9
Mar. 6.5 5.7 3.2 7.8 8.4 7.4 10.8 4.0 7.1 5.4 6.9
Apr. 6.4 5.8 3.2 7.8 8.3 7.3 10.8 4.0 6.9 5.3 6.8
May ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4.0 ... ... ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2021 2.6 3.2 5 3.2 4.5 2.1 2.1 0.6 2.4 1.9 2.7 3.2
2022 8.4 10.3 8.7 19.4 7.2 5.9 9.3 8.1 8.7 10.7 17.2
2023 6 5.4 2.3 6.0 9.1 4.3 5.7 4.2 5.2 5.9 8.4 9.1
2023 Dec. 2.9 0.5 3.8 4.3 1.3 4.1 3.7 3.2 0.5 5.4 0.9
2024 Jan. 2.8 1.5 3.1 5.0 1.1 3.4 3.2 2.7 0.9 4.8 1.1
Feb. 2.6 3.6 2.7 4.4 1.1 3.2 3.1 2.3 0.8 4.8 0.6
Mar. 2.4 3.8 2.3 4.1 0.6 2.4 3.4 1.7 1.2 4.9 1.0
Apr. 2.4 4.9 2.4 3.1 0.6 2.4 3.2 1.6 0.9 4.7 1.1
May 2.6 4.9 2.8 3.1 0.4 2.6 2.4 2.0 0.8 4.3 0.0
General government financial balance 7
As a percentage of GDP
2021 –5.2 –5.4 –3.6 –2.5 –2.8 –6.6 –7.0 –1.5 –8.7 –2.5 –7.2
2022 –3.7 –3.6 –2.5 –1.0 –0.4 –4.8 –2.5 1.7 –8.6 0.1 –4.6
2023 –3.6 –4.4 –2.4 –3.4 –2.7 –5.5 –1.6 1.7 –7.4 –0.7 –2.2
General government debt 7
As a percentage of GDP
2021 94.8 107.9 69.0 17.8 72.6 113.0 195.0 54.4 147.1 77.5 44.4
2022 90.8 104.3 66.1 18.5 73.5 111.9 172.7 44.4 140.5 67.8 41.8
2023 88.6 105.2 63.6 19.6 75.8 110.6 161.9 43.7 137.3 63.0 43.6
Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, European Central Bank, Federal Statistical
Office, Bundesbank calculations. Latest data are partly based on press reports and areprovisional.  1 Euro area: quarterly data seasonally and calendar adjusted.  2 Manu-
facturing, mining and energy: adjusted for working-day variations.  3 Manufacturing:

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
7•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
6.3 7.2 12.5 6.2 4.2 5.7 4.8 8.2 6.4 9.9 2021
2.4 1.4 8.1 4.3 4.8 6.8 1.9 2.5 5.8 5.1 2022
–0.3 –1.1 5.7 0.1 –0.8 2.3 1.6 1.6 2.5 2.5 2023
0.1 –2.3 7.0 2.9 1.7 3.1 1.3 –0.2 3.8 2.3 2022 Q4
–2.4 –1.3 6.3 1.8 2.2 2.7 0.2 1.1 4.5 3.0 2023 Q1
0.8 –0.4 5.0 –0.1 –1.7 2.1 1.8 1.7 2.1 2.2 Q2
0.3 –1.9 7.2 –0.8 –2.0 2.0 2.0 1.3 1.5 2.6 Q3
–0.2 –0.8 4.4 –0.4 –1.5 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.0 2.1 Q4
2.9 –0.4 4.6 –0.7 –1.2 1.3 2.7 2.1 2.4 3.5 2024 Q1
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
20.1 8.4 –0.9 5.0 11.3 3.9 10.3 10.2 7.7 6.0 2021
9.3 –1.3 1.5 2.6 6.7 0.6 –4.1 1.2 2.9 2.6 2022
–5.2 –5.7 7.1 –0.0 –1.5 –3.1 0.3 –5.6 –1.1 2.0 2023
–3.1 –3.3 8.0 1.3 2.7 0.8 –9.4 –5.7 0.7 1.4 2022 Q4
–11.7 –4.4 15.9 3.1 1.0 1.4 –2.3 –3.4 0.7 –0.5 2023 Q1
0.1 –6.9 7.8 –0.6 –1.1 –5.2 0.3 –4.1 –2.0 1.3 Q2
–5.5 –7.7 2.1 –0.7 –0.8 –4.9 1.1 –10.1 –1.8 2.8 Q3
–3.2 –3.8 3.7 –1.8 –4.9 –3.5 2.1 –5.1 –1.2 4.0 Q4
–0.8 –4.3 –4.1 –2.5 –7.0 1.1 1.3 –3.1 1.5 4.7 2024 Q1
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
76.7 82.0 76.8 82.4 87.1 79.1 82.2 84.5 77.8 51.2 2021
77.8 80.7 64.7 83.7 87.7 81.9 83.3 84.9 78.7 58.2 2022
68.4 73.1 68.1 81.9 85.3 81.7 82.1 83.1 76.9 61.6 2023
68.0 74.3 65.7 83.0 87.0 81.5 80.2 83.3 77.1 59.5 2023 Q1
69.0 75.5 53.3 82.5 86.3 83.5 84.0 83.9 76.3 61.2 Q2
68.2 72.0 69.4 81.3 84.6 80.9 83.0 82.9 76.2 62.6 Q3
68.5 70.5 84.1 80.9 83.3 80.9 81.0 82.4 77.8 63.3 Q4
70.6 74.8 75.6 78.8 84.0 81.0 80.1 80.6 77.2 65.1 2024 Q1
70.1 75.3 76.4 79.6 83.3 81.2 77.6 80.8 77.7 63.9 Q2
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
e 7.2 e 5.4 e 3.8 e 4.2 e 6.2 e 6.8 e 6.9 e 4.8 e 15.0 e 7.5 2021
e 5.9 e 4.6 e 3.5 e 3.6 e 4.8 e 6.2 e 6.2 e 4.0 e 13.0 e 6.8 2022
e 6.9 e 5.2 e 3.1 e 3.5 e 5.1 e 6.5 e 5.9 e 3.7 e 12.2 e 6.1 2023
7.0 5.5 2.8 3.6 5.4 6.5 5.6 3.4 11.9 5.8 2023 Dec.
7.4 5.6 3.0 3.6 5.0 6.5 5.6 3.3 11.9 5.9 2024 Jan.
7.5 5.6 3.0 3.7 4.7 6.6 5.6 3.3 11.8 5.5 Feb.
7.5 5.6 3.0 3.6 4.9 6.4 5.6 3.3 11.7 4.9 Mar.
7.5 5.6 3.1 3.7 4.7 6.3 5.6 3.3 11.7 4.4 Apr.
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... May
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
4.6 3.5 0.7 2.8 2.8 0.9 2.8 2.0 3.0 2.3 2021
18.9 8.2 6.1 11.6 8.6 8.1 12.1 9.3 8.3 8.1 2022
8.7 2.9 5.6 4.1 7.7 5.3 11.0 7.2 3.4 3.9 2023
1.6 3.2 3.7 1.0 5.7 1.9 6.6 3.8 3.3 1.9 2023 Dec.
1.1 3.0 3.7 3.1 4.3 2.5 4.4 3.4 3.5 2.1 2024 Jan.
1.1 3.2 3.0 2.7 4.0 2.3 3.8 3.4 2.9 2.1 Feb.
0.4 3.2 2.7 3.1 4.1 2.6 2.7 3.4 3.3 1.6 Mar.
0.4 3.0 2.4 2.6 3.4 2.3 2.4 3.0 3.4 2.1 Apr.
0.9 3.2 2.3 2.7 3.3 3.8 2.6 2.5 3.8 3.0 May
General government financial balance 7
As a percentage of GDP
–1.1 0.5 –7.6 –2.2 –5.8 –2.9 –5.2 –4.6 –6.7 –1.8 2021
–0.6 –0.3 –5.5 –0.1 –3.3 –0.3 –1.7 –3.0 –4.7 2.7 2022
–0.8 –1.3 –4.9 –0.3 –2.7 1.2 –4.9 –2.5 –3.6 3.1 2023
General government debt 7
As a percentage of GDP
43.4 24.5 53.9 51.7 82.5 124.5 61.1 74.4 116.8 99.3 2021
38.1 24.7 51.6 50.1 78.4 112.4 57.7 72.5 111.6 85.6 2022
38.3 25.7 50.4 46.5 77.8 99.1 56.0 69.2 107.7 77.3 2023
quarterly data seasonally adjusted. Data collection at the beginning of the quarter.
4 Monthly data seasonally adjusted.  5 Influenced by a temporary reduction of valueadded tax between July and December 2020.  6 Including Croatia from 2023 onwards.
7 According to Maastricht Treaty definition.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
8•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts *
a) Euro area 1
€ billion
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2022 Sep. 86.6 83.1 –0.1 3.4 2.2 –52.8 –199.5 –146.7 19.5 –16.4 –0.4 4.0 32.2
Oct. –12.6 –0.1 –6.2 –12.5 –9.7 – 1.2 169.1 170.3 –13.3 –14.7 0.1 10.4 –9.1
Nov. 93.8 84.8 31.8 9.0 14.3 15.1 –40.3 –55.3 31.6 1.4 0.2 34.0 –3.9
Dec. –121.0 –87.9 –0.5 –33.1 –41.3 2.5 –254.6 –257.1 50.9 11.0 0.1 0.7 39.2
2023 Jan. – 9.9 –0.4 –15.9 –9.5 –4.1 12.5 127.9 115.4 28.0 –6.4 2.2 57.3 –25.1
Feb. 7.9 –12.9 3.3 20.8 29.8 6.8 –1.4 –8.2 15.5 –1.1 1.6 10.3 4.7
Mar. 29.9 37.1 11.7 –7.2 –9.7 74.4 111.8 37.3 27.9 10.3 1.3 5.8 10.6
Apr. – 5.6 27.9 29.5 –33.5 –29.3 –21.2 –21.7 –0.5 10.5 9.4 1.4 3.9 –4.2
May – 0.2 45.5 33.2 –45.7 –50.0 4.4 22.2 17.8 37.6 –0.5 2.4 27.1 8.6
June 5.1 –9.1 –12.3 14.3 21.1 109.6 13.5 –96.1 43.9 1.2 2.8 26.8 13.1
July –45.5 7.0 5.2 –52.5 –52.1 36.9 109.0 72.1 33.7 0.9 2.9 18.9 11.1
Aug. –56.3 –67.0 –12.2 10.7 13.4 31.4 61.8 30.4 20.8 –2.4 4.0 9.3 9.8
Sep. 36.9 33.5 –1.6 3.5 2.6 62.7 –106.7 –169.4 43.2 15.3 5.0 11.2 11.8
Oct. –33.7 6.0 –10.4 –39.7 –39.3 54.6 49.4 –5.2 29.4 –9.3 4.7 26.3 7.7
Nov. 38.1 47.0 –1.0 –8.9 –4.9 59.0 51.3 –7.7 16.6 –4.7 5.6 22.6 –6.8
Dec. –58.8 –47.3 2.6 –11.5 –20.4 26.4 –100.2 –126.5 24.9 12.5 5.9 4.5 2.0
2024 Jan. – 8.8 –1.5 25.7 –7.3 –7.0 118.0 111.8 –6.3 56.8 –3.6 7.0 61.3 –7.8
Feb. 38.9 38.2 6.8 0.7 11.2 –15.6 98.2 113.8 5.4 0.8 4.8 15.8 –16.0
Mar. 56.1 48.1 4.1 8.0 8.3 64.2 96.6 32.4 38.9 5.0 3.0 34.4 –3.5
Apr. 33.9 26.5 3.2 7.5 3.5 48.5 11.0 –37.5 7.7 –7.1 2.6 19.6 –7.4
b) German contribution
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2022 Sep. 21.5 23.1 0.1 –1.7 –4.5 –27.4 1.6 29.0 4.1 –0.3 –0.0 –0.6 5.0
Oct. 12.8 10.5 –0.2 2.3 1.9 45.1 20.4 –24.7 –7.6 –1.2 0.2 3.2 –9.8
Nov. 25.4 26.2 1.4 –0.9 0.8 38.0 8.9 –29.1 9.8 1.9 0.2 7.1 0.6
Dec. –28.8 –19.6 –2.4 –9.3 –8.2 –37.1 –71.9 –34.8 –0.5 –3.7 0.4 –1.9 4.8
2023 Jan. 27.5 16.9 –0.2 10.7 8.9 63.0 29.8 –33.3 –14.3 2.7 1.0 3.1 –21.0
Feb. 9.2 8.3 –0.2 0.9 1.8 58.4 –2.0 –60.3 3.3 0.6 1.2 –2.1 3.5
Mar. 4.8 8.1 6.4 –3.4 –3.7 –12.4 10.5 23.0 15.5 6.0 1.6 4.4 3.5
Apr. – 3.7 13.0 1.2 –16.7 –20.2 62.7 –15.2 –77.9 5.0 2.0 1.5 –3.0 4.5
May 5.0 11.3 –1.3 –6.3 –4.7 9.6 16.5 6.9 16.9 2.7 2.2 6.1 5.8
June 1.5 –1.9 4.1 3.4 5.4 7.6 –6.6 –14.3 9.7 –0.9 2.7 –0.3 8.2
July 5.1 6.8 –1.1 –1.7 –4.7 34.0 8.3 –25.7 24.9 –0.3 3.0 10.2 12.0
Aug. – 6.8 –5.0 –6.1 –1.8 0.3 25.7 –5.3 –31.0 6.6 –2.7 2.7 0.2 6.4
Sep. – 8.2 1.7 0.8 –9.9 –13.3 – 0.1 –2.8 –2.7 21.1 0.1 2.9 11.6 6.4
Oct. – 2.0 0.1 –0.2 –2.1 –5.2 16.2 4.9 –11.3 11.8 –0.1 3.0 5.9 3.0
Nov. 12.2 13.1 –1.1 –0.8 1.8 13.7 –3.4 –17.1 10.6 3.7 3.4 1.0 2.4
Dec. –18.0 –11.1 2.5 –6.9 –5.1 –17.4 –10.6 6.8 8.8 3.2 2.5 1.7 1.4
2024 Jan. 11.1 2.0 –0.5 9.1 6.7 74.5 20.7 –53.7 –1.8 –0.1 2.5 12.7 –17.0
Feb. 10.6 20.2 6.8 –9.6 –7.6 –17.0 40.0 57.1 –6.9 –1.6 2.4 7.7 –15.3
Mar. 8.3 4.3 0.5 4.0 2.0 6.6 4.2 –2.4 –5.3 1.7 1.7 2.4 –11.1
Apr. –13.3 –3.8 –3.9 –9.5 –12.9 40.3 3.3 –37.1 16.6 2.3 0.9 11.2 2.1
* The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also the "Notes on the figures" in the "Explanatory notes" of the
Statistical Series Banking Statistics).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Excluding MFIs' portfolios.  3 Afterdeduction of inter-MFI participations.  4 Including the counterparts of monetary
liabilities of central governments.  5 Including the monetary liabilities of central
governments (Post Office, Treasury).  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.  7 Paper held
by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.  8 Less German MFIs' holdings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
9•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
a) Euro area 1
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2
Money stock M1
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments Total  4of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue Total Total TotalCurrency
in circu-
lationOvernight
deposits  5Deposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 years  5Deposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  5,6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  2,7,8Debt secur-
ities with
maturities
of up to
2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)
(net)  2,7 Period
7.6 15.1 0.0 1.4 – 1.9 –101.1 –1.4 –99.6 99.7 – 0.6 –19.5 –8.4 21.7 2022 Sep.
– 5.2 66.2 0.0 –57.9 –77.1 –157.5 –0.4 –157.1 85.4 – 5.0 4.3 36.7 –25.5 Oct.
–10.2 1.1 0.0 70.1 20.9 –30.6 –3.5 –27.1 58.8 – 7.3 27.4 22.3 16.4 Nov.
–84.6 –64.2 0.0 2.7 12.5 –61.6 11.6 –73.2 60.8 13.3 –46.5 2.8 10.4 Dec.
–38.8 129.3 0.0 –133.7 –149.8 –232.0 –13.3 –218.7 76.0 6.1 35.0 6.8 – 8.1 2023 Jan.
20.2 21.2 0.0 –42.0 –63.4 –135.6 –3.5 –132.1 72.2 0.0 – 2.2 –6.4 29.8 Feb.
31.3 30.7 0.0 16.9 10.2 –103.9 3.9 –107.8 119.6 – 5.5 –25.7 20.6 9.4 Mar.
–27.2 –10.5 0.0 – 0.9 –18.0 –52.1 4.1 –56.3 45.6 –11.4 6.7 11.5 0.2 Apr.
–104.4 81.2 0.0 –30.4 –44.9 –94.3 1.7 –96.0 52.9 – 3.5 29.6 1.5 4.2 May
24.5 44.7 0.0 6.6 22.4 –60.9 3.1 –64.0 94.4 –11.2 –11.2 –6.2 – 3.7 June
–29.1 1.3 0.0 0.3 –28.3 –91.0 3.0 –94.1 73.3 –10.6 4.1 10.6 – 0.9 July
–20.0 5.3 0.0 –43.4 –45.1 –101.9 –7.6 –94.2 81.1 –24.3 4.4 8.4 0.8 Aug.
35.1 –14.6 0.0 46.5 44.6 –11.6 –3.1 – 8.5 79.8 –23.6 – 5.8 –0.7 – 2.1 Sep.
–28.6 55.8 0.0 –44.9 –87.9 –169.2 –4.4 –164.8 103.0 –21.7 25.2 18.8 8.4 Oct.
–48.3 45.4 0.0 76.1 54.4 18.3 –2.9 21.3 48.8 –12.7 22.3 16.9 –10.2 Nov.
14.4 –223.3 0.0 166.9 166.2 71.7 13.8 57.9 75.8 18.7 –27.1 14.4 – 2.1 Dec.
18.9 155.4 0.0 –132.5 –181.6 –238.2 –17.1 –221.1 61.0 – 4.4 27.2 30.8 1.8 2024 Jan.
9.1 5.4 0.0 1.2 15.0 –31.1 –0.9 –30.3 55.8 – 9.6 5.2 –11.4 – 5.4 Feb.
–26.8 –25.9 0.0 121.6 103.7 57.9 5.2 52.7 46.7 – 0.8 23.9 15.7 – 9.2 Mar.
22.9 51.5 0.0 14.6 –34.1 –29.4 2.5 –31.9 –1.2 – 3.4 6.5 22.4 5.4 Apr.
b) German contribution
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10
of which: Components of the money stock
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments TotalIntra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9,11Currency
in circu-
lation TotalOvernight
depositsDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  7,8maturities
with
maturities
of up to 2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)(net)  7 Period
4.7 – 1.1 3.3 0.3 – 13.6 – 56.8 45.1 – 5.3 – 2.6 0.1 6.0 2022 Sep.
5.1 65.9 0.1 0.1 – 5.4 – 32.1 36.8 – 3.3 – 0.2 0.1 – 6.7 Oct.
22.6 13.6 – 0.0 – 0.3 17.3 12.6 4.3 – 5.5 3.2 0.0 2.7 Nov.
– 16.3 – 24.6 2.1 2.4 – 24.6 – 37.6 19.0 – 4.1 – 2.0 0.1 0.0 Dec.
– 42.9 147.9 2.3 – 5.1 – 0.2 – 37.1 38.4 – 6.5 – 0.1 – 0.2 5.4 2023 Jan.
12.9 50.9 1.1 – 0.7 0.4 – 33.2 32.6 – 8.0 1.3 – 0.1 7.8 Feb.
27.1 – 34.8 2.3 0.9 – 15.5 – 45.7 31.8 – 10.4 – 0.2 0.3 8.7 Mar.
– 39.0 86.7 1.9 0.7 6.3 – 11.7 25.3 – 10.2 0.7 0.2 1.9 Apr.
– 11.8 2.8 2.6 0.9 6.7 – 6.2 18.4 – 10.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 5.1 May
– 9.8 8.4 1.7 1.1 0.8 – 29.2 36.7 – 10.0 – 0.3 – 0.0 3.6 June
– 6.4 20.0 1.6 1.3 0.7 – 21.8 31.5 – 10.3 0.3 0.3 0.8 July
7.4 – 1.5 2.9 – 1.9 6.4 – 21.1 30.4 – 11.2 1.1 0.1 7.1 Aug.
– 11.6 – 12.1 3.6 – 1.7 – 5.7 – 13.3 17.8 – 8.6 – 1.0 0.1 – 0.7 Sep.
– 2.4 2.9 1.5 – 0.5 1.9 – 31.2 38.8 – 9.4 0.8 – 0.1 3.0 Oct.
– 9.5 13.9 1.1 – 0.4 11.1 9.4 11.7 – 10.5 1.1 0.1 – 0.8 Nov.
7.7 – 62.1 2.4 2.8 10.2 – 6.6 25.1 – 5.0 – 1.2 0.1 – 2.2 Dec.
– 6.7 108.3 – 7.4 3.7 – 14.3 – 47.5 37.6 – 9.1 3.0 0.1 1.4 2024 Jan.
– 2.3 0.0 2.4 – 0.6 2.7 – 18.3 27.1 – 7.4 1.0 0.0 0.3 Feb.
2.0 – 2.1 2.9 0.7 20.3 2.8 24.9 – 5.8 – 1.5 0.2 – 0.3 Mar.
– 2.9 22.7 1.8 1.5 – 9.4 – 4.4 6.1 – 5.5 – 0.3 0.2 – 5.4 Apr.
of paper issued by euro area MFIs.  9 Including national banknotes still in circulation.
10 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates should on no
account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are therefore not
comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.  11 Thedifference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank
and the amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the
Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
10•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
End of
monthTotal
assets or
liabilities Total Total LoansDebt
securities  2Shares and
other
equities Total LoansDebt
securities  3 
 
Claims
on non-
euro area
residentsOther
assets
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2022 Mar. 32,937.0 21,736.8 15,175.7 12,722.0 1,587.1 866.7 6,561.1 1,001.4 5,559.7 6,996.1 4,204.1
Apr. 33,569.7 21,763.8 15,253.7 12,805.3 1,597.3 851.1 6,510.1 1,011.3 5,498.8 7,063.0 4,742.9
May 33,482.1 21,815.9 15,304.1 12,878.2 1,567.8 858.1 6,511.7 1,003.9 5,507.8 7,013.2 4,653.1
June 33,885.7 21,885.6 15,373.2 12,973.4 1,568.7 831.1 6,512.4 1,003.0 5,509.4 7,064.5 4,935.5
July 33,877.3 21,984.3 15,451.1 13,043.7 1,578.2 829.2 6,533.1 1,003.0 5,530.1 7,216.9 4,676.2
Aug. 34,342.9 21,872.4 15,459.5 13,080.1 1,553.7 825.7 6,413.0 996.9 5,416.1 7,301.6 5,168.9
Sep. 34,619.1 21,901.4 15,558.0 13,191.3 1,544.9 821.7 6,343.4 998.1 5,345.2 7,241.7 5,476.0
Oct. 34,548.0 21,890.7 15,552.2 13,190.1 1,532.8 829.3 6,338.6 995.2 5,343.3 7,334.6 5,322.6
Nov. 34,224.2 22,011.6 15,627.3 13,228.2 1,559.0 840.1 6,384.3 990.3 5,394.1 7,206.4 5,006.2
Dec. 33,866.5 21,792.5 15,515.3 13,123.9 1,556.0 835.4 6,277.3 999.1 5,278.2 6,873.4 5,200.5
2023 Jan. 33,815.0 21,883.8 15,553.5 13,173.2 1,544.6 835.6 6,330.3 1,000.3 5,330.0 6,983.9 4,947.3
Feb. 34,096.8 21,862.6 15,545.5 13,159.9 1,541.0 844.6 6,317.2 991.3 5,325.9 7,001.6 5,232.6
Mar. 33,934.5 21,919.3 15,573.6 13,173.9 1,552.3 847.4 6,345.7 995.4 5,350.4 7,099.4 4,915.8
Apr. 33,944.3 21,908.7 15,601.1 13,168.5 1,566.4 866.2 6,307.6 991.1 5,316.5 7,038.3 4,997.3
May 34,136.7 21,919.4 15,651.0 13,186.1 1,595.6 869.4 6,268.4 995.4 5,273.0 7,150.8 5,066.5
June 34,048.0 21,915.2 15,637.2 13,182.4 1,584.4 870.4 6,277.9 988.5 5,289.4 7,065.9 5,066.9
July 34,186.4 21,866.9 15,642.3 13,180.8 1,586.3 875.1 6,224.6 988.2 5,236.4 7,153.2 5,166.3
Aug. 34,238.5 21,811.6 15,573.8 13,123.8 1,576.8 873.2 6,237.8 986.1 5,251.7 7,251.4 5,175.5
Sep. 34,380.9 21,796.4 15,601.8 13,156.3 1,574.6 870.9 6,194.7 987.3 5,207.4 7,195.5 5,389.0
Oct. 34,345.6 21,755.0 15,598.6 13,167.0 1,555.6 876.0 6,156.4 984.1 5,172.3 7,262.4 5,328.1
Nov. 34,141.1 21,851.5 15,660.4 13,220.8 1,558.6 881.0 6,191.2 980.8 5,210.3 7,251.7 5,037.9
Dec. 33,768.0 21,858.4 15,626.8 13,177.4 1,552.1 897.3 6,231.6 989.4 5,242.2 7,143.2 4,766.4
2024 Jan. 33,833.3 21,825.7 15,622.8 13,145.8 1,569.4 907.5 6,202.9 987.6 5,215.3 7,293.2 4,714.5
Feb. 34,006.0 21,839.7 15,653.7 13,167.9 1,569.7 916.2 6,185.9 977.4 5,208.5 7,382.6 4,783.8
Mar. 34,222.3 21,914.2 15,704.4 13,208.5 1,567.2 928.6 6,209.9 976.9 5,232.9 7,546.0 4,762.1
Apr. 34,406.4 21,919.5 15,724.3 13,232.1 1,563.9 928.3 6,195.2 980.3 5,215.0 7,597.5 4,889.4
German contribution (€ billion)
2022 Mar. 7,997.7 5,280.7 3,990.2 3,464.4 240.6 285.2 1,290.6 278.6 1,012.0 1,447.5 1,269.5
Apr. 8,259.4 5,278.9 4,008.0 3,481.9 240.1 286.1 1,270.9 283.2 987.7 1,464.0 1,516.5
May 8,228.4 5,304.5 4,034.5 3,506.0 240.8 287.7 1,270.0 280.3 989.7 1,445.0 1,479.0
June 8,413.5 5,322.6 4,058.9 3,537.6 237.8 283.5 1,263.7 282.5 981.2 1,466.1 1,624.8
July 8,287.9 5,375.0 4,096.1 3,560.3 252.7 283.2 1,278.8 283.6 995.2 1,481.5 1,431.4
Aug. 8,546.0 5,364.5 4,132.0 3,600.0 249.1 282.9 1,232.5 281.5 951.0 1,492.4 1,689.0
Sep. 8,857.6 5,356.3 4,153.9 3,624.8 246.1 283.0 1,202.4 284.3 918.1 1,502.4 1,998.8
Oct. 8,826.7 5,366.0 4,163.6 3,634.6 245.9 283.1 1,202.4 284.8 917.5 1,509.0 1,951.8
Nov. 8,653.9 5,402.0 4,189.2 3,656.3 249.8 283.1 1,212.8 283.4 929.4 1,502.4 1,749.6
Dec. 8,626.1 5,345.2 4,165.8 3,636.7 245.9 283.2 1,179.4 283.2 896.1 1,417.3 1,863.7
2023 Jan. 8,561.4 5,377.1 4,178.3 3,652.7 245.9 279.7 1,198.8 285.0 913.9 1,443.8 1,740.5
Feb. 8,712.0 5,371.7 4,186.6 3,662.2 243.6 280.9 1,185.1 284.0 901.1 1,443.9 1,896.4
Mar. 8,573.5 5,388.1 4,193.6 3,661.9 252.1 279.6 1,194.5 284.2 910.3 1,457.2 1,728.2
Apr. 8,559.3 5,383.7 4,206.2 3,672.7 252.4 281.1 1,177.5 287.7 889.8 1,435.7 1,739.8
May 8,614.3 5,389.9 4,217.4 3,685.4 252.1 279.9 1,172.6 286.1 886.4 1,468.3 1,756.1
June 8,647.9 5,387.4 4,215.9 3,679.0 255.5 281.4 1,171.5 284.2 887.4 1,433.5 1,826.9
July 8,779.6 5,390.2 4,222.0 3,685.7 255.6 280.6 1,168.3 287.2 881.1 1,439.0 1,950.5
Aug. 8,776.6 5,383.7 4,215.6 3,685.5 249.4 280.6 1,168.1 285.0 883.0 1,442.2 1,950.7
Sep. 8,834.2 5,362.1 4,216.4 3,686.3 248.5 281.5 1,145.8 288.4 857.4 1,446.5 2,025.5
Oct. 8,844.5 5,360.6 4,215.5 3,685.5 247.9 282.1 1,145.1 291.6 853.5 1,461.4 2,022.6
Nov. 8,661.3 5,385.7 4,228.0 3,697.3 248.4 282.3 1,157.8 289.7 868.1 1,446.0 1,829.6
Dec. 8,491.7 5,384.9 4,217.3 3,682.2 247.9 287.2 1,167.6 287.1 880.5 1,432.1 1,674.6
2024 Jan. 8,532.9 5,390.7 4,218.3 3,682.5 246.2 289.6 1,172.4 289.5 882.9 1,463.2 1,679.1
Feb. 8,600.8 5,391.4 4,236.7 3,694.8 250.2 291.7 1,154.7 287.7 867.0 1,502.2 1,707.2
Mar. 8,586.9 5,404.4 4,241.0 3,697.7 246.0 297.3 1,163.4 289.8 873.7 1,524.9 1,657.5
Apr. 8,674.2 5,380.1 4,235.7 3,697.3 244.1 294.3 1,144.4 293.1 851.3 1,543.4 1,750.7
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national
central banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Including money market paper ofenterprises.  3 Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by general
government.  4 Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p.12●). Excluding
MFIs` cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
11•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed
maturities ofAt agreed
notice of  6
Currency
in
circulation  4 Totalof which:
in euro  5 Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 monthsEnd of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
1,509.6 15,890.4 14,466.3 14,650.6 9,490.5 703.7 123.5 1,809.6 2,492.1 31.2 2022 Mar.
1,520.7 15,933.5 14,522.8 14,712.1 9,555.8 705.4 123.5 1,802.0 2,494.3 31.0 Apr.
1,528.5 15,949.6 14,569.6 14,740.8 9,597.9 684.9 120.2 1,803.2 2,506.6 27.9 May
1,535.1 16,099.7 14,633.8 14,810.3 9,643.8 704.8 123.4 1,800.3 2,510.4 27.5 June
1,543.7 16,183.5 14,738.8 14,937.4 9,735.4 741.0 127.1 1,791.0 2,515.8 27.1 July
1,539.1 16,161.1 14,793.6 14,985.4 9,754.1 781.5 125.9 1,770.0 2,526.0 28.0 Aug.
1,537.7 16,198.7 14,785.5 15,036.4 9,688.0 913.3 125.5 1,756.3 2,525.7 27.6 Sep.
1,537.2 16,095.0 14,708.1 14,936.4 9,507.1 992.6 130.1 1,741.6 2,522.9 42.1 Oct.
1,533.7 16,084.4 14,722.6 14,917.3 9,441.8 1,042.2 134.2 1,740.7 2,516.0 42.3 Nov.
1,545.3 15,996.8 14,766.2 14,929.6 9,373.7 1,099.5 133.9 1,750.1 2,530.0 42.4 Dec.
1,533.4 15,876.1 14,667.2 14,844.5 9,206.0 1,165.1 146.4 1,746.7 2,532.0 48.2 2023 Jan.
1,529.9 15,842.9 14,625.4 14,773.4 9,061.8 1,225.3 157.6 1,747.0 2,531.8 49.9 Feb.
1,533.8 15,891.9 14,649.7 14,788.7 8,967.7 1,313.9 174.0 1,756.9 2,524.8 51.4 Mar.
1,537.9 15,848.9 14,650.2 14,784.8 8,918.3 1,346.2 187.9 1,765.8 2,513.9 52.8 Apr.
1,539.7 15,718.0 14,617.4 14,756.8 8,834.7 1,387.5 200.1 1,768.2 2,511.0 55.2 May
1,542.7 15,760.5 14,649.9 14,755.9 8,755.6 1,455.8 218.3 1,768.4 2,499.8 58.0 June
1,545.9 15,696.0 14,619.8 14,725.5 8,663.0 1,512.2 231.6 1,768.5 2,489.2 60.9 July
1,538.3 15,646.8 14,595.5 14,694.0 8,578.0 1,579.2 240.9 1,765.9 2,465.1 65.0 Aug.
1,535.2 15,756.0 14,654.7 14,766.5 8,569.3 1,647.6 255.2 1,782.7 2,441.7 70.1 Sep.
1,530.8 15,636.6 14,576.9 14,702.2 8,421.3 1,736.6 275.6 1,773.4 2,420.5 74.9 Oct.
1,527.9 15,648.3 14,645.5 14,759.2 8,426.3 1,776.1 286.2 1,782.0 2,408.0 80.6 Nov.
1,541.7 15,822.6 14,816.0 14,927.5 8,489.3 1,826.8 302.1 1,795.3 2,427.3 86.7 Dec.
1,524.1 15,687.2 14,668.3 14,801.5 8,295.5 1,879.2 317.0 1,793.6 2,423.4 92.8 2024 Jan.
1,523.2 15,709.3 14,689.3 14,792.0 8,241.0 1,924.1 325.3 1,790.1 2,413.7 97.8 Feb.
1,528.4 15,792.0 14,786.0 14,897.9 8,297.0 1,964.2 327.5 1,795.6 2,412.7 100.9 Mar.
1,530.9 15,779.5 14,757.2 14,898.9 8,292.5 1,977.1 327.9 1,788.3 2,409.6 103.5 Apr.
German contribution (€ billion)
344.3 4,441.6 4,159.0 4,014.6 2,755.3 130.7 29.3 540.4 536.0 22.9 2022 Mar.
346.7 4,445.6 4,158.1 4,019.8 2,754.8 140.0 29.4 537.7 535.1 22.7 Apr.
349.4 4,478.3 4,170.7 4,016.7 2,769.9 125.8 29.7 534.8 533.9 22.6 May
349.9 4,517.1 4,194.6 4,031.6 2,787.1 127.8 30.1 531.9 532.3 22.4 June
359.0 4,507.6 4,222.4 4,070.3 2,813.6 142.1 31.0 530.6 530.6 22.3 July
371.5 4,552.6 4,289.4 4,135.2 2,870.1 153.3 30.6 530.7 528.3 22.2 Aug.
371.8 4,541.5 4,267.4 4,135.1 2,834.9 193.7 30.9 530.3 523.0 22.2 Sep.
371.8 4,546.8 4,270.2 4,140.4 2,804.0 233.2 31.6 529.3 519.8 22.4 Oct.
371.5 4,578.7 4,283.7 4,146.3 2,806.0 240.1 32.1 531.0 514.4 22.6 Nov.
374.0 4,534.2 4,260.8 4,119.2 2,764.3 260.2 34.1 527.1 510.4 23.0 Dec.
368.9 4,489.3 4,257.7 4,126.0 2,749.9 286.6 36.9 529.6 499.1 24.0 2023 Jan.
368.1 4,496.6 4,250.9 4,106.5 2,706.5 314.2 39.1 530.3 491.2 25.2 Feb.
369.0 4,505.7 4,236.8 4,090.4 2,667.4 336.4 42.4 536.3 481.0 26.8 Mar.
369.8 4,473.0 4,248.0 4,104.2 2,660.3 360.2 46.1 538.3 471.0 28.3 Apr.
370.7 4,469.7 4,256.0 4,103.8 2,647.5 373.8 50.3 540.9 460.8 30.5 May
371.7 4,460.3 4,259.3 4,096.2 2,616.5 400.5 54.1 541.0 450.9 33.2 June
373.1 4,455.4 4,259.2 4,106.1 2,603.8 426.9 57.6 540.8 440.7 36.2 July
371.2 4,460.4 4,259.8 4,101.7 2,577.8 455.8 61.5 538.1 429.6 38.9 Aug.
369.4 4,448.9 4,258.5 4,104.2 2,568.6 468.0 66.2 538.5 421.1 41.8 Sep.
369.0 4,447.4 4,259.3 4,129.3 2,553.2 507.9 73.1 538.5 411.7 44.8 Oct.
368.6 4,454.3 4,281.0 4,149.1 2,561.8 515.9 79.5 542.6 401.2 48.3 Nov.
371.4 4,470.1 4,290.9 4,150.5 2,539.8 532.4 84.0 547.3 396.2 50.8 Dec.
375.1 4,448.1 4,271.5 4,150.1 2,502.4 569.5 89.5 548.1 387.2 53.4 2024 Jan.
374.5 4,447.8 4,273.8 4,147.4 2,481.0 590.5 94.7 545.6 379.8 55.8 Feb.
375.2 4,475.1 4,300.5 4,166.8 2,483.2 607.5 97.0 547.6 374.1 57.4 Mar.
376.6 4,472.1 4,300.8 4,182.9 2,486.9 620.5 98.7 549.9 368.6 58.4 Apr.
euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by theBundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item "Intra-Eurosystem
liability/claim related to banknote issue" (see "Other liability items").  5 Excluding central
governments' deposits.  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
12•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) * (cont'd)
Liabilities (cont'd)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont'd)
General government 
 
Debt securities 
Other general governmentRepo transactions
with non-banks
in the euro area
 
With agreed maturities of 
At agreed notice of  2
End of
monthCentral
govern-
ment Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 months Totalof which:
Enterprises
and
householdsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  3 Totalof which:
Denom-
inated
in euro
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2022 Mar. 768.3 471.5 305.4 82.5 20.5 42.4 17.3 3.4 283.8 283.6 583.8 2,026.4 1,358.2
Apr. 745.8 475.6 307.8 83.4 21.2 42.6 17.2 3.4 310.1 309.9 604.0 2,073.5 1,362.4
May 717.1 491.8 317.7 88.4 22.3 43.3 16.8 3.3 313.0 312.9 593.9 2,037.7 1,337.4
June 786.9 502.5 326.0 90.9 22.9 43.3 16.2 3.2 281.2 281.1 592.9 2,068.9 1,360.7
July 755.9 490.3 303.3 100.4 24.2 42.9 16.2 3.3 306.0 305.9 590.8 2,090.6 1,360.7
Aug. 675.5 500.1 309.7 104.6 24.0 42.5 16.1 3.2 283.8 283.7 597.5 2,113.5 1,375.1
Sep. 683.2 479.1 282.0 111.2 24.5 42.3 16.0 3.2 264.8 264.7 589.1 2,153.5 1,415.1
Oct. 678.1 480.5 287.5 109.2 24.3 41.5 14.7 3.2 268.2 268.2 625.8 2,129.7 1,415.7
Nov. 668.3 498.9 306.5 109.2 25.1 40.8 14.2 3.2 294.8 294.8 648.0 2,159.0 1,441.3
Dec. 583.5 483.7 296.2 103.6 27.2 40.2 13.5 3.0 247.7 247.7 650.9 2,166.2 1,474.6
2023 Jan. 550.6 480.9 283.2 113.2 27.5 40.6 12.8 3.7 283.3 283.3 657.7 2,204.8 1,510.1
Feb. 570.9 498.6 297.5 115.2 28.7 40.3 13.2 3.7 281.6 281.5 651.3 2,259.2 1,531.4
Mar. 602.4 500.8 288.6 125.8 28.4 39.6 14.7 3.7 255.3 255.2 672.0 2,257.0 1,551.1
Apr. 575.3 488.8 278.5 123.3 29.7 39.4 14.2 3.7 261.7 261.3 683.4 2,253.1 1,561.0
May 470.7 490.6 277.9 126.7 29.3 39.4 13.8 3.6 291.9 287.8 685.0 2,298.9 1,589.9
June 495.1 509.5 288.6 134.7 29.4 39.3 13.8 3.6 280.4 280.3 678.8 2,312.7 1,600.2
July 466.0 504.6 281.7 137.7 28.4 39.4 13.9 3.6 284.1 283.4 689.4 2,402.1 1,645.9
Aug. 446.0 506.9 283.2 138.6 28.0 39.6 13.8 3.5 288.9 288.9 698.0 2,419.3 1,655.7
Sep. 481.2 508.2 285.3 136.7 29.3 39.7 13.8 3.4 281.7 281.7 697.3 2,442.9 1,668.7
Oct. 452.7 481.7 266.6 131.0 28.5 39.2 13.1 3.3 306.8 306.6 716.2 2,501.6 1,704.8
Nov. 404.4 484.6 274.9 127.5 27.2 38.9 13.0 3.2 328.5 328.4 733.2 2,497.5 1,704.9
Dec. 418.8 476.3 265.6 128.4 28.4 38.6 12.4 3.1 320.5 320.5 746.5 2,490.7 1,706.5
2024 Jan. 437.3 448.4 238.5 127.8 28.4 37.5 12.2 4.0 345.4 343.4 777.5 2,534.9 1,737.0
Feb. 446.3 470.9 260.7 130.6 26.1 38.1 11.7 3.8 348.0 347.2 766.2 2,545.8 1,756.7
Mar. 419.6 474.5 258.7 135.5 26.9 37.7 12.0 3.7 372.0 371.2 781.9 2,569.9 1,767.7
Apr. 442.7 437.9 232.4 129.8 22.6 37.7 11.8 3.7 378.6 372.2 804.6 2,597.7 1,782.7
German contribution (€ billion)
2022 Mar. 170.6 256.4 137.6 68.8 17.0 30.7 2.2 0.1 6.3 6.3 2.4 581.5 354.8
Apr. 167.6 258.2 137.6 70.0 17.6 30.6 2.2 0.2 4.4 4.4 2.2 596.5 357.3
May 190.1 271.4 144.2 75.3 18.5 31.1 2.2 0.2 4.8 4.8 2.4 596.8 359.0
June 205.0 280.5 147.7 80.5 19.0 31.0 2.2 0.1 5.4 5.4 2.3 604.2 362.6
July 166.8 270.4 128.3 89.0 20.2 30.6 2.2 0.1 9.8 9.8 2.4 613.8 369.1
Aug. 142.7 274.6 129.4 92.2 20.4 30.4 2.2 0.1 8.0 8.0 2.3 625.7 384.5
Sep. 147.4 259.1 109.0 96.6 20.8 30.3 2.2 0.1 5.4 5.4 2.4 640.0 395.3
Oct. 152.5 253.9 108.1 93.1 20.5 30.1 2.1 0.1 5.2 5.2 2.5 633.9 398.1
Nov. 175.5 256.9 114.7 88.9 21.5 29.8 1.9 0.1 8.3 8.3 2.5 634.2 402.6
Dec. 159.2 255.8 117.3 83.2 23.9 29.6 1.8 0.1 6.3 6.3 2.6 631.2 409.3
2023 Jan. 116.4 246.9 99.4 92.2 23.8 29.8 1.6 0.1 6.1 6.1 2.4 639.6 417.9
Feb. 129.3 260.8 110.3 94.6 24.6 29.7 1.5 0.1 7.5 7.5 2.3 651.5 427.1
Mar. 156.4 258.8 102.2 101.4 24.1 29.6 1.4 0.1 7.2 7.2 2.6 658.0 440.3
Apr. 117.4 251.4 97.3 97.8 25.4 29.5 1.3 0.1 7.9 7.9 2.7 654.9 446.8
May 105.6 260.2 104.8 99.5 25.0 29.7 1.2 0.1 7.7 7.7 2.6 670.6 458.1
June 95.9 268.2 106.1 106.5 24.9 29.5 1.1 0.1 7.3 7.3 2.6 671.6 452.8
July 89.5 259.9 96.6 109.1 23.7 29.5 0.9 0.1 7.6 7.6 2.9 679.9 457.6
Aug. 96.8 261.9 100.9 107.1 23.3 29.6 0.9 0.1 8.7 8.7 3.0 688.8 469.0
Sep. 85.2 259.5 97.5 107.0 24.5 29.6 0.8 0.1 7.8 7.8 3.0 705.6 470.0
Oct. 82.8 235.3 81.6 99.3 24.1 29.4 0.7 0.1 8.5 8.5 2.9 713.0 476.3
Nov. 73.3 231.8 81.2 97.7 22.7 29.2 0.7 0.1 9.6 9.6 3.0 706.2 471.0
Dec. 81.1 238.6 84.9 100.3 23.9 28.6 0.7 0.1 8.4 8.4 3.2 699.9 476.8
2024 Jan. 74.4 223.6 75.5 95.6 24.0 27.8 0.7 0.1 11.4 11.4 3.3 717.4 486.5
Feb. 72.0 228.4 78.6 98.8 21.6 28.6 0.6 0.1 12.4 12.4 3.3 727.1 494.5
Mar. 74.0 234.4 79.3 103.5 22.5 28.3 0.6 0.1 11.0 10.9 3.5 727.8 501.4
Apr. 71.2 218.0 72.0 97.9 19.3 28.2 0.6 0.1 10.6 10.6 3.7 736.7 505.7
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national central
banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 In Germany, only savings deposits.
3 Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding German MFIs'
portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area.  4 In Germany, bank debt
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper.5 Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued.  6 After deduction of inter-MFI
participations.  7 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.
8 Including DEM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on p. 10●). 9 For
the German contribution, the difference between the volume of euro banknotes

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
13•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  Memo item:
Other liability items  
 
issued (net)  3Monetary aggregates  7
(from 2002 German contribution
excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
up to
1 year  4over
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsLiabilities
to non-
euro area
residents  5Capital
and
reserves  6Excess
of
inter-MFI
liabilities Total  8of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem-
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12Monetary
capital
forma-
tion  13Monetary
liabilities
of central
govern-
ments
(Post
Office,
Treasury)  14 End of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
30.7 6.2 1,989.5 5,610.4 3,003.0 38.6 3,991.1 0.0 11,477.1 14,940.4 15,684.2 6,879.1 195.4 2022 Mar.
39.0 16.2 2,018.2 5,747.9 2,979.2 – 2.1 4,402.9 0.0 11,557.8 15,026.8 15,811.5 6,876.5 197.5 Apr.
34.0 15.6 1,988.1 5,795.4 2,915.9 16.2 4,332.0 0.0 11,619.4 15,082.6 15,856.6 6,781.6 199.3 May
47.8 14.4 2,006.6 5,719.5 2,905.3 26.4 4,656.6 0.0 11,680.1 15,173.2 15,943.0 6,786.4 199.6 June
15.1 16.4 2,059.1 5,863.1 2,970.9 8.3 4,320.5 0.0 11,762.6 15,311.3 16,066.2 6,894.3 204.2 July
16.7 19.0 2,077.8 5,915.0 2,890.6 34.5 4,807.9 0.0 11,776.2 15,378.0 16,137.5 6,812.1 197.0 Aug.
34.9 19.5 2,099.1 5,899.0 2,845.2 16.6 5,114.7 0.0 11,681.6 15,419.9 16,180.2 6,773.7 196.2 Sep.
3.8 24.0 2,102.0 6,038.8 2,819.4 38.0 4,995.9 0.0 11,505.4 15,322.1 16,100.0 6,749.8 196.4 Oct.
23.7 22.8 2,112.5 5,881.3 2,857.4 66.0 4,699.4 0.0 11,459.9 15,323.0 16,151.7 6,796.8 200.1 Nov.
31.7 23.2 2,111.2 5,553.5 2,820.5 57.8 4,827.8 0.0 11,381.7 15,315.5 16,131.8 6,767.5 192.7 Dec.
17.6 27.8 2,159.4 5,636.6 2,862.8 85.8 4,674.6 0.0 11,192.9 15,211.1 16,042.8 6,861.4 191.6 2023 Jan.
47.0 30.4 2,181.8 5,670.8 2,811.6 79.6 4,970.0 0.0 11,060.3 15,153.2 16,008.8 6,834.3 192.2 Feb.
54.0 30.4 2,172.6 5,657.4 2,893.9 82.3 4,691.0 0.0 10,949.5 15,154.1 16,013.6 6,918.2 182.5 Mar.
50.1 32.9 2,170.0 5,633.4 2,886.1 110.2 4,729.5 0.0 10,894.5 15,132.7 16,007.4 6,917.9 182.9 Apr.
56.0 32.8 2,210.1 5,722.1 2,908.9 155.3 4,816.9 0.0 10,807.7 15,099.2 15,990.6 6,985.4 178.5 May
49.8 33.0 2,229.9 5,584.3 2,886.4 146.9 4,855.3 0.0 10,742.3 15,116.8 15,989.8 6,985.6 178.0 June
47.0 34.0 2,321.1 5,594.1 2,909.1 102.3 4,963.4 0.0 10,648.3 15,084.0 15,984.3 7,102.7 180.5 July
50.1 33.3 2,335.8 5,656.5 2,928.1 121.8 4,940.8 0.0 10,553.8 15,042.0 15,946.1 7,138.0 176.9 Aug.
45.1 36.4 2,361.4 5,541.0 2,889.0 113.2 5,124.6 0.0 10,547.3 15,094.3 16,001.0 7,146.4 180.3 Sep.
54.5 36.6 2,410.5 5,511.8 2,922.3 121.5 5,098.0 0.0 10,375.9 15,003.5 15,954.5 7,223.6 179.6 Oct.
45.2 35.9 2,416.4 5,446.4 2,951.3 165.0 4,843.2 0.0 10,387.7 15,047.8 16,020.2 7,272.5 180.8 Nov.
46.0 34.8 2,409.9 5,299.3 3,018.4 55.9 4,472.4 0.0 10,446.0 15,199.4 16,192.2 7,351.9 177.4 Dec.
40.6 36.1 2,458.2 5,334.6 2,998.2 105.6 4,526.0 0.0 10,212.3 15,026.4 16,060.2 7,384.2 180.3 2024 Jan.
33.7 36.3 2,475.8 5,447.5 2,960.5 98.8 4,606.7 0.0 10,181.6 15,039.0 16,057.8 7,366.0 182.7 Feb.
22.5 40.1 2,507.3 5,482.7 3,025.2 106.4 4,563.8 0.0 10,239.5 15,142.8 16,181.3 7,470.4 179.9 Mar.
25.3 39.6 2,532.9 5,462.9 3,031.3 109.8 4,711.1 0.0 10,212.3 15,111.2 16,195.6 7,497.3 176.7 Apr.
German contribution (€ billion)
14.8 7.3 559.5 1,299.3 781.2 –1,190.8 2,076.2 520.0 2,892.9 3,677.0 3,707.8 1,934.7 0.0 2022 Mar.
14.6 7.1 574.8 1,284.0 769.2 –1,168.1 2,325.6 523.3 2,892.4 3,686.8 3,715.1 1,935.2 0.0 Apr.
14.9 7.3 574.6 1,307.0 748.6 –1,199.2 2,289.8 526.8 2,914.0 3,699.5 3,728.9 1,911.8 0.0 May
18.7 6.6 578.9 1,317.0 743.1 –1,255.4 2,479.8 530.5 2,934.8 3,726.6 3,759.7 1,907.5 0.0 June
21.2 6.8 585.8 1,287.5 779.7 –1,189.6 2,276.7 525.2 2,941.9 3,757.1 3,797.3 1,949.2 0.0 July
21.8 7.6 596.2 1,349.3 739.6 –1,271.6 2,540.1 513.5 2,999.5 3,826.5 3,866.3 1,919.1 0.0 Aug.
27.5 8.1 604.3 1,385.2 711.9 –1,287.1 2,858.3 516.8 2,944.0 3,811.2 3,854.6 1,899.2 0.0 Sep.
19.1 9.7 605.0 1,355.1 693.8 –1,215.2 2,804.7 516.8 2,912.1 3,812.3 3,848.8 1,880.8 0.0 Oct.
20.8 11.2 602.2 1,310.2 714.6 –1,191.2 2,596.7 516.8 2,920.8 3,819.7 3,862.5 1,900.3 0.0 Nov.
20.2 11.7 599.3 1,265.7 690.1 –1,230.4 2,726.5 518.9 2,881.6 3,795.1 3,835.9 1,869.2 0.0 Dec.
24.0 13.1 602.4 1,226.5 689.1 –1,117.5 2,625.9 521.2 2,849.3 3,789.5 3,835.2 1,874.9 0.0 2023 Jan.
29.3 15.8 606.4 1,171.8 668.4 –1,073.2 2,787.2 522.2 2,816.8 3,782.0 3,836.8 1,860.1 0.0 Feb.
36.2 17.5 604.3 1,188.0 700.6 –1,129.7 2,641.2 524.5 2,769.6 3,756.4 3,819.8 1,897.7 0.0 Mar.
37.0 18.5 599.4 1,107.1 704.2 –1,028.5 2,637.8 526.4 2,757.6 3,759.4 3,825.5 1,899.8 0.0 Apr.
41.2 19.5 609.9 1,122.5 715.6 –1,036.9 2,662.4 529.0 2,752.3 3,762.8 3,833.9 1,926.7 0.0 May
44.6 19.2 607.9 1,099.9 709.8 –1,026.8 2,723.1 530.7 2,722.6 3,760.6 3,834.2 1,921.6 0.0 June
44.5 19.9 615.4 1,070.7 724.0 –996.4 2,835.7 532.2 2,700.4 3,759.3 3,834.2 1,946.1 0.0 July
51.0 20.6 617.2 1,044.4 734.2 –998.8 2,835.9 535.1 2,678.7 3,756.9 3,840.1 1,958.1 0.0 Aug.
48.5 22.6 634.5 1,048.4 722.8 –1,000.9 2,898.6 538.7 2,666.2 3,753.7 3,835.5 1,967.4 0.0 Sep.
49.7 24.4 639.0 1,035.9 735.9 –998.0 2,898.7 540.2 2,634.8 3,751.7 3,837.2 1,987.9 0.0 Oct.
49.6 23.6 633.1 1,012.0 753.5 –983.0 2,705.7 541.3 2,643.0 3,760.7 3,846.5 2,006.8 0.0 Nov.
45.9 25.0 629.0 1,016.2 778.6 –1,034.8 2,550.2 543.7 2,624.7 3,762.2 3,844.6 2,034.5 0.0 Dec.
46.9 25.6 645.0 967.8 758.4 –959.8 2,586.3 536.2 2,577.9 3,744.3 3,831.5 2,032.8 0.0 2024 Jan.
46.4 26.4 654.4 1,024.7 731.1 –992.0 2,646.3 538.6 2,559.6 3,745.7 3,834.2 2,015.6 0.0 Feb.
45.7 26.7 655.4 1,022.6 744.6 –988.1 2,590.4 541.5 2,562.4 3,767.6 3,854.5 2,033.5 0.0 Mar.
40.7 26.3 669.7 987.8 747.4 –960.0 2,675.8 543.3 2,558.9 3,764.4 3,845.7 2,053.7 0.0 Apr.
actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2).  10 Overnight deposits (excluding central governments'
deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central governments'
overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the consolidated balance
sheet.  11 M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to two years and at agreednotice of up to three months (excluding central governments' deposits) and (for the
euro area) central governments' monetary liabilities with such maturities.  12 M2 plus
repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt securities
up to two years.  13 Deposits with agreed maturities of over two years and at agreed
notice of over three months, debt securities with maturities of over two years, capital
and reserves.  14 Non-existent in Germany.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
14•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
3. Banking systems liquidity position *
Stocks
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8
Eurosystem 2
2022 May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 934.2 0.5 2,198.8 0.0 4,939.1 681.3 0.0 1,591.5 624.1 1,129.1 4,046.1 6,319.0
July 943.7 1.0 2,149.4 0.0 4,958.8 678.7 0.0 1,604.0 667.6 1,158.0 3,943.3 6,226.0
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 950.1 1.7 2,124.9 0.0 4,954.8 707.0 0.0 1,585.3 553.9 1,249.2 3,936.1 6,228.5
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 955.8 4.0 2,118.8 0.0 4,948.3 4,490.0 0.0 1,563.7 536.7 1,104.4 332.0 6,385.7
Dec. 960.4 1.9 1,947.1 0.0 4,946.1 4,521.5 0.0 1,560.8 492.5 1,066.9 213.8 6,296.2
2023 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 940.4 1.2 1,303.3 0.1 4,942.1 4,051.6 0.0 1,565.6 372.8 1,001.6 195.6 5,812.7
Mar. 916.8 0.9 1,233.3 0.0 4,939.0 4,103.0 0.0 1,553.9 380.2 861.8 191.1 5,848.0
Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 945.0 1.4 1,117.7 0.1 4,905.6 3,996.1 0.0 1,559.8 360.6 870.5 182.7 5,738.6
June 948.2 1.6 1,100.5 0.1 4,884.1 4,126.4 0.0 1,563.7 256.4 806.6 181.6 5,871.7
July . . . . . . . . . . . .
Aug. 927.8 10.9 682.0 0.1 4,853.0 3,704.4 0.0 1,567.0 254.4 770.5 177.4 5,448.9
Sep. 924.3 5.6 601.0 0.1 4,811.2 3,647.4 0.0 1,564.2 222.5 733.8 174.3 5,386.0
Oct. 931.2 8.1 515.4 0.1 4,767.9 3,577.4 0.0 1,554.7 222.7 693.3 174.6 5,306.7
Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec. 933.3 7.3 495.9 0.0 4,715.0 3,548.8 0.0 1,551.1 194.1 685.3 172.0 5,271.9
2024 Jan. 958.3 7.9 396.2 0.1 4,686.8 3,487.4 0.0 1,556.7 168.4 666.3 170.5 5,214.6
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 966.5 4.8 397.3 0.0 4,646.4 3,490.9 0.0 1,543.2 168.5 643.8 168.6 5,202.7
Apr. 1,002.8 2.8 249.4 0.0 4,599.5 3,337.9 0.0 1,546.1 137.8 664.3 168.4 5,052.3
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
Deutsche Bundesbank
2022 May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 230.4 0.1 420.2 0.0 1,087.4 189.9 0.0 388.0 196.9 – 183.1 1,147.4 1,725.3
July 231.7 0.3 409.1 0.0 1,084.3 185.8 0.0 390.3 214.9 – 175.4 1,109.7 1,685.8
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 232.1 0.3 403.6 0.0 1,076.8 228.5 0.0 379.5 157.9 – 161.8 1,108.8 1,716.8
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 231.7 0.8 400.5 0.0 1,071.5 1,304.0 0.0 379.0 127.2 – 231.4 125.9 1,808.8
Dec. 232.4 0.5 352.5 0.0 1,079.2 1,346.6 0.0 378.8 121.0 – 242.4 60.5 1,785.9
2023 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 229.8 0.4 231.9 0.1 1,076.8 1,234.6 0.0 377.2 77.8 – 205.4 54.8 1,666.7
Mar. 228.9 0.4 212.8 0.0 1,077.0 1,263.7 0.0 374.5 69.2 – 242.5 54.2 1,692.4
Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 239.2 0.7 200.2 0.1 1,066.1 1,228.0 0.0 375.7 73.4 – 221.1 50.1 1,653.9
June 241.7 0.7 198.9 0.1 1,056.8 1,256.3 0.0 377.2 54.7 – 241.8 52.0 1,685.4
July . . . . . . . . . . . .
Aug. 236.2 1.5 142.4 0.1 1,048.8 1,175.5 0.0 377.5 49.9 – 222.5 48.4 1,601.5
Sep. 234.5 0.8 131.2 0.1 1,041.3 1,177.8 0.0 377.3 40.1 – 235.4 48.0 1,603.1
Oct. 235.7 1.3 96.3 0.0 1,024.0 1,151.1 0.0 374.9 28.7 – 245.4 47.9 1,574.0
Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec. 236.8 0.7 89.2 0.0 1,016.7 1,171.3 0.0 373.5 18.9 – 267.7 47.3 1,592.1
2024 Jan. 243.9 0.9 69.5 0.1 1,005.8 1,127.3 0.0 379.3 19.8 – 253.3 47.0 1,553.6
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 246.5 0.7 69.3 0.0 996.7 1,164.4 0.0 379.2 16.3 – 293.4 46.7 1,590.3
Apr. 256.1 0.7 40.4 0.0 983.5 1,122.4 0.0 379.4 17.1 – 284.1 45.9 1,547.7
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
Discrepancies may arise from rounding.  * The banking system's liquidity position is
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro area credit institutions with the
Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of the
Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  1 Figures are daily averages
for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following the
changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No figuresare available in such cases.  2 Source: ECB.  3 Includes liquidity provided under the
Eurosystem's asset purchase programmes.  4 From August 2009 includes liquidity
absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem's foreign exchange swap operations.  5 From
2002 euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national cen-
tral banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In accordance with the
accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a
share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
15•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Flows
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1
Eurosystem 2
. . . . . . . . . . . .2022 May
+21.0 + 0.1 – 1.0 ± 0.0 +49.9 –33.6 ± 0.0 +15.6 –43.7 +12.4 +118.8 +100.9 June
+ 9.5 + 0.5 –49.4 ± 0.0 +19.7 – 2.6 ± 0.0 +12.5 +43.5 +28.9 –102.8 –93.0 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 6.4 + 0.7 –24.5 ± 0.0 – 4.0 +28.3 ± 0.0 –18.7 –113.7 +91.2 – 7.2 + 2.5 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
+ 5.7 + 2.3 – 6.1 ± 0.0 – 6.5 +3,783.0 ± 0.0 –21.6 –17.2 –144.8 –3,604.1 +157.2 Nov.
+ 4.6 – 2.1 –171.7 ± 0.0 – 2.2 +31.5 ± 0.0 – 2.9 –44.2 –37.5 –118.2 –89.5 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2023 Jan.
–20.0 – 0.7 –643.8 + 0.1 – 4.0 –469.9 ± 0.0 + 4.8 –119.7 –65.3 –18.2 –483.5 Feb.
–23.6 – 0.3 –70.0 – 0.1 – 3.1 +51.4 ± 0.0 –11.7 +7.4 –139.8 – 4.5 +35.3 Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr.
+28.2 + 0.5 –115.6 + 0.1 –33.4 –106.9 ± 0.0 + 5.9 –19.6 + 8.7 – 8.4 –109.4 May
+ 3.2 + 0.2 –17.2 ± 0.0 –21.5 +130.3 ± 0.0 + 3.9 –104.2 –63.9 – 1.1 +133.1 June
. . . . . . . . . . . . July
–20.4 + 9.3 –418.5 ± 0.0 –31.1 –422.0 ± 0.0 + 3.3 –2.0 –36.1 – 4.2 –422.8 Aug.
– 3.5 – 5.3 –81.0 ± 0.0 –41.8 –57.0 ± 0.0 – 2.8 –31.9 –36.7 – 3.1 –62.9 Sep.
+ 6.9 + 2.5 –85.6 ± 0.0 –43.3 –70.0 ± 0.0 – 9.5 +0.2 –40.5 + 0.3 –79.3 Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov.
+ 2.1 – 0.8 –19.5 – 0.1 –52.9 –28.6 ± 0.0 – 3.6 –28.6 – 8.0 – 2.6 –34.8 Dec.
+25.0 + 0.6 –99.7 + 0.1 –28.2 –61.4 ± 0.0 + 5.6 –25.7 –19.0 – 1.5 –57.3 2024 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
+ 8.2 – 3.1 + 1.1 – 0.1 –40.4 + 3.5 ± 0.0 –13.5 +0.1 –22.5 – 1.9 –11.9 Mar.
+36.3 – 2.0 –147.9 ± 0.0 –46.9 –153.0 ± 0.0 + 2.9 –30.7 +20.5 – 0.2 –150.4 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
Deutsche Bundesbank
. . . . . . . . . . . .2022 May
+ 6.6 + 0.1 – 0.6 – 0.0 +18.7 – 7.7 ± 0.0 + 3.0 +0.2 + 6.0 +24.1 +19.4 June
+ 1.3 + 0.2 –11.1 – 0.0 – 3.1 – 4.1 ± 0.0 + 2.4 +18.0 + 7.7 –37.7 –39.5 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 0.4 + 0.0 – 5.5 – 0.0 – 7.5 +42.7 ± 0.0 –10.8 –57.1 +13.5 – 0.9 +31.0 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
– 0.5 + 0.5 – 3.1 + 0.0 – 5.3 +1,075.5 ± 0.0 – 0.6 –30.7 –69.6 –982.9 +92.0 Nov.
+ 0.7 – 0.4 –48.0 + 0.0 + 7.7 +42.7 ± 0.0 – 0.1 –6.2 –11.0 –65.4 –22.9 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2023 Jan.
– 2.5 – 0.1 –120.6 + 0.1 – 2.4 –112.0 ± 0.0 – 1.6 –43.2 +37.0 – 5.6 –119.3 Feb.
– 1.0 + 0.0 –19.1 – 0.0 + 0.2 +29.1 ± 0.0 – 2.7 –8.6 –37.1 – 0.7 +25.7 Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr.
+10.3 + 0.2 –12.7 + 0.0 –11.0 –35.7 ± 0.0 + 1.2 +4.1 +21.4 – 4.1 –38.5 May
+ 2.6 + 0.1 – 1.3 + 0.0 – 9.3 +28.3 ± 0.0 + 1.4 –18.7 –20.7 + 1.9 +31.5 June
. . . . . . . . . . . . July
– 5.6 + 0.8 –56.5 – 0.0 – 8.0 –80.8 ± 0.0 + 0.4 –4.7 +19.3 – 3.5 –83.9 Aug.
– 1.7 – 0.7 –11.2 + 0.0 – 7.5 + 2.3 ± 0.0 – 0.2 –9.8 –13.0 – 0.4 + 1.6 Sep.
+ 1.2 + 0.5 –35.0 – 0.0 –17.3 –26.7 ± 0.0 – 2.4 –11.5 – 9.9 – 0.0 –29.1 Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov.
+ 1.1 – 0.6 – 7.1 – 0.0 – 7.3 +20.1 ± 0.0 – 1.4 –9.8 –22.3 – 0.7 +18.1 Dec.
+ 7.1 + 0.2 –19.7 + 0.0 –10.9 –44.0 ± 0.0 + 5.8 +0.9 +14.3 – 0.3 –38.5 2024 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
+ 2.6 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 9.0 +37.2 ± 0.0 – 0.2 –3.5 –40.1 – 0.3 +36.7 Mar.
+ 9.6 + 0.0 –28.9 – 0.0 –13.3 –42.0 ± 0.0 + 0.3 +0.7 + 9.3 – 0.8 –42.6 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is shown
under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the euro
banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB
has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other factors”. From 2003 eurobanknotes only.  6 Remaining items in the consolidated financial statement of the Euro-
system and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  7 Equal to the difference bet-
ween the sum of liquidity-pro viding factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors.
8 Calculated as the sum of the “Deposit facility”, “Banknotes in circulation” and “Credit
institutions' current account balances”.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
16•
III.Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets *
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currencyClaims on non-euro area
residents denominated in euro
As at
reporting
dateTotal
assets 
Gold and gold
receivables TotalReceivables
from the IMFBalances with
banks, security
investments,
external loans
and other
external
assetsClaims on
euro area
residents
denominated
in foreign
currency TotalBalances
with banks,
security
investments
and loansClaims
arising from
the credit
facility under
ERM II
Eurosystem 1
2023 Nov. 17 7,001.1 613.3 507.1 234.0 273.0 14.5 15.0 15.0 –
24 6,995.8 613.3 507.4 234.1 273.3 14.2 15.2 15.2 –
Dec. 1 7,002.0 613.3 507.4 234.1 273.3 13.9 15.0 15.0 –
8 6,993.5 613.3 506.7 234.1 272.6 14.7 15.0 15.0 –
15 6,987.4 613.3 507.6 234.1 273.5 14.2 15.0 15.0 –
22 6,899.2 613.3 507.9 233.7 274.2 15.4 14.9 14.9 –
29 6,935.5 649.1 499.6 229.0 270.6 13.9 20.1 20.1 –
2024 Jan. 5 6,919.8 649.1 499.9 229.5 270.5 13.3 15.3 15.3 –
12 6,923.7 649.1 498.7 229.2 269.5 15.0 15.7 15.7 –
19 6,889.3 649.1 498.8 229.1 269.6 14.5 15.2 15.2 –
26 6,887.6 649.1 499.1 229.6 269.5 14.9 15.8 15.8 –
Feb. 2 6,865.4 649.1 499.5 230.0 269.5 14.7 16.0 16.0 –
9 6,861.4 649.1 499.6 229.9 269.7 14.7 15.0 15.0 –
16 6,842.7 649.1 500.4 229.9 270.5 14.5 15.4 15.4 –
23 6,830.9 649.1 500.8 229.9 270.9 14.6 16.1 16.1 –
Mar. 1 6,820.0 649.1 501.3 229.8 271.5 13.8 15.1 15.1 –
8 6,813.2 649.1 499.9 229.6 270.3 15.1 15.4 15.4 –
15 6,815.6 649.1 501.4 229.6 271.8 13.9 15.6 15.6 –
22 6,810.0 649.1 498.2 229.1 269.1 15.7 15.7 15.7 –
29 6,619.7 711.2 504.7 231.5 273.2 15.1 15.9 15.9 –
Apr. 5 6,585.3 711.2 506.1 231.5 274.7 14.1 15.7 15.7 –
12 6,596.7 711.2 505.5 231.4 274.1 14.9 16.6 16.6 –
19 6,593.2 711.1 505.4 231.3 274.1 14.8 16.2 16.2 –
26 6,598.9 711.1 505.0 231.7 273.3 15.3 16.4 16.4 –
May 3 6,582.1 711.1 505.6 231.6 273.9 15.1 16.6 16.6 –
10 6,581.0 711.1 505.4 232.1 273.2 15.3 16.3 16.3 –
17 6,562.4 711.1 505.7 232.2 273.5 15.1 17.0 17.0 –
24 6,577.7 711.1 506.6 232.2 274.4 14.6 17.7 17.7 –
31 6,560.7 711.1 506.7 232.6 274.2 13.8 16.8 16.8 –
June 7 6,541.6 711.1 507.3 232.6 274.8 14.3 17.2 17.2 –
Deutsche Bundesbank
2023 Nov. 17 2,513.2 190.2 93.3 58.9 34.4 0.0 – – –
24 2,522.1 190.2 93.3 58.9 34.4 0.0 – – –
Dec. 1 2,511.5 190.2 93.2 58.9 34.3 0.0 – – –
8 2,536.1 190.2 93.2 58.9 34.3 0.0 – – –
15 2,512.8 190.2 92.9 58.9 34.0 0.0 – – –
22 2,490.5 190.2 92.6 58.7 33.9 0.0 – – –
29 2,536.2 201.3 90.9 57.5 33.4 0.0 5.2 5.2 –
2024 Jan. 5 2,501.5 201.3 90.4 58.0 32.3 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
12 2,513.7 201.3 90.0 57.7 32.3 0.0 0.6 0.6 –
19 2,483.0 201.3 90.3 57.7 32.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
26 2,497.5 201.3 90.5 57.8 32.8 0.0 0.5 0.5 –
Feb. 2 2,512.4 201.3 90.9 57.9 33.0 0.0 0.7 0.7 –
9 2,508.1 201.3 91.2 57.9 33.3 0.0 0.9 0.9 –
16 2,518.7 201.3 91.6 57.8 33.9 0.0 1.4 1.4 –
23 2,500.9 201.3 92.3 57.6 34.7 0.0 1.9 1.9 –
Mar. 1 2,504.7 201.3 92.2 57.5 34.6 0.0 0.9 0.9 –
8 2,496.1 201.3 91.8 57.5 34.3 0.0 1.2 1.2 –
15 2,481.0 201.3 91.8 57.5 34.3 0.0 1.3 1.3 –
22 2,478.2 201.3 91.5 57.5 34.0 0.0 1.1 1.1 –
29 2,447.7 220.6 92.2 57.8 34.3 0.0 0.8 0.8 –
Apr. 5 2,448.6 220.6 91.9 57.8 34.1 0.0 0.8 0.8 –
12 2,439.1 220.6 91.9 57.8 34.1 0.0 1.2 1.2 –
19 2,423.9 220.5 92.6 57.8 34.8 0.0 0.8 0.8 –
26 2,413.4 220.5 92.1 57.8 34.4 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
May 3 2,446.6 220.5 92.1 57.9 34.2 0.0 1.0 1.0 –
10 2,458.4 220.5 92.1 57.9 34.2 0.0 0.6 0.6 –
17 2,442.2 220.5 91.5 57.9 33.6 0.0 1.2 1.2 –
24 2,461.4 220.5 91.7 57.9 33.8 0.0 1.7 1.7 –
31 2,425.5 220.5 92.0 58.2 33.8 0.0 1.0 1.0 –
June 7 2,439.1 220.5 92.2 58.2 34.0 0.0 0.9 0.9 –
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet itemsfor foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the end of
the quarter.  1 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
17•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euroSecurities of euro area residents
in euro
TotalMain re-
financing
opera-
tionsLonger-
term re-
financing
opera-
tionsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsStructural
reverse
opera-
tionsMarginal
lending
facility 
 
 
 
Credits
related
to margin
callsOther
claims on
euro area
credit
institutions
denomi-
nated in
euro TotalSecurities
held for
monetary
policy
purposesOther
securitiesGeneral
government
debt deno-
minated in
euroOther
assetsAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 1
503.0 7.1 495.8 – – 0.0 – 24.7 4,921.9 4,720.9 201.1 21.0 380.6 2023 Nov. 17
503.2 7.3 495.8 – – 0.0 – 23.9 4,917.6 4,715.7 201.9 21.0 380.1 24
504.4 8.5 496.0 – – – – 31.6 4,911.2 4,709.4 201.7 21.0 384.3 Dec. 1
502.5 6.5 496.0 – – – – 25.5 4,913.6 4,710.5 203.1 21.0 381.3 8
502.7 6.5 496.0 – – 0.3 – 27.0 4,905.7 4,701.4 204.3 21.0 380.9 15
404.8 8.4 396.2 – – 0.2 – 33.5 4,904.0 4,701.3 202.7 21.0 384.5 22
410.3 14.1 396.2 – – 0.0 – 28.7 4,899.0 4,694.3 204.6 20.9 393.9 29
403.6 7.4 396.2 – – – – 32.0 4,895.2 4,691.0 204.2 20.9 390.5 2024 Jan. 5
402.2 6.0 396.2 – – – – 28.5 4,897.7 4,693.3 204.4 20.9 395.9 12
402.1 5.9 396.2 – – – – 25.0 4,877.2 4,671.2 206.0 20.9 386.5 19
401.8 5.6 396.2 – – – – 24.0 4,880.9 4,673.4 207.5 20.9 381.1 26
403.3 6.4 396.9 – – – – 30.4 4,866.7 4,661.9 204.9 20.9 364.8 Feb. 2
401.7 4.7 396.9 – – – – 21.0 4,866.2 4,663.9 202.3 20.9 373.2 9
401.3 4.3 396.9 – – 0.0 – 20.4 4,848.7 4,646.7 202.0 20.9 372.0 16
401.5 4.5 396.9 – – 0.0 – 26.6 4,847.3 4,644.6 202.7 20.9 354.1 23
403.4 5.3 398.0 – – 0.0 – 37.2 4,830.7 4,628.7 202.0 20.9 348.5 Mar. 1
401.6 3.6 398.0 – – – – 23.7 4,832.7 4,630.1 202.5 20.9 354.8 8
400.4 2.4 398.0 – – – – 27.9 4,829.7 4,624.7 204.9 20.9 356.8 15
400.0 2.0 398.0 – – – – 35.1 4,824.3 4,618.1 206.2 20.9 350.9 22
156.2 5.9 150.3 – – – – 34.4 4,802.6 4,595.0 207.6 20.8 358.7 29
152.5 2.2 150.3 – – – – 23.0 4,789.3 4,579.4 209.9 20.8 352.5 Apr. 5
151.7 1.4 150.3 – – – – 21.7 4,795.6 4,582.8 212.8 20.8 358.6 12
151.9 1.6 150.3 – – 0.0 – 24.5 4,786.6 4,571.4 215.1 20.8 361.8 19
154.8 4.5 150.3 – – 0.0 – 26.7 4,788.5 4,572.6 215.9 20.8 360.2 26
151.4 2.0 149.4 – – – – 27.1 4,777.4 4,562.2 215.2 20.8 356.8 May 3
151.1 1.7 149.4 – – – – 21.7 4,782.2 4,566.6 215.6 20.8 357.0 10
150.6 1.2 149.4 – – – – 20.0 4,763.2 4,547.2 216.0 20.8 358.7 17
150.8 1.3 149.4 – – – – 26.2 4,765.5 4,548.2 217.4 20.8 364.3 24
152.0 4.9 147.1 – – – – 35.4 4,740.1 4,522.4 217.7 20.8 363.9 31
149.5 2.3 147.1 – – – – 28.0 4,739.7 4,521.4 218.3 20.8 353.7 June 7
Deutsche Bundesbank
90.2 0.9 89.2 – – 0.0 – 11.5 1,018.3 1,018.3 – 4.4 1,105.3 2023 Nov. 17
90.1 0.9 89.2 – – 0.0 – 11.8 1,015.7 1,015.7 – 4.4 1,116.5 24
90.0 0.9 89.1 – – – – 12.0 1,015.6 1,015.6 – 4.4 1,106.0 Dec. 1
89.5 0.3 89.1 – – – – 12.2 1,016.3 1,016.3 – 4.4 1,130.2 8
89.6 0.2 89.1 – – 0.3 – 10.4 1,010.5 1,010.5 – 4.4 1,114.8 15
70.4 0.7 69.5 – – 0.2 – 10.4 1,010.2 1,010.2 – 4.4 1,112.2 22
72.3 2.7 69.5 – – – – 5.8 1,009.1 1,009.1 – 4.4 1,147.2 29
69.9 0.4 69.5 – – – – 9.6 1,005.6 1,005.6 – 4.4 1,119.9 2024 Jan. 5
69.7 0.1 69.5 – – – – 12.1 1,006.1 1,006.1 – 4.4 1,129.5 12
70.1 0.6 69.5 – – – – 8.7 1,001.6 1,001.6 – 4.4 1,106.5 19
70.2 0.7 69.5 – – – – 8.6 1,002.2 1,002.2 – 4.4 1,119.6 26
70.1 0.8 69.3 – – – – 9.2 1,002.2 1,002.2 – 4.4 1,133.5 Feb. 2
69.7 0.4 69.3 – – – – 7.4 1,002.3 1,002.3 – 4.4 1,130.8 9
69.9 0.5 69.3 – – 0.0 – 5.5 994.2 994.2 – 4.4 1,150.3 16
70.1 0.7 69.3 – – 0.0 – 9.2 992.7 992.7 – 4.4 1,129.0 23
70.4 1.1 69.3 – – 0.0 – 10.8 993.3 993.3 – 4.4 1,131.4 Mar. 1
69.9 0.6 69.3 – – – – 10.1 994.0 994.0 – 4.4 1,123.4 8
69.8 0.4 69.3 – – – – 10.1 989.1 989.1 – 4.4 1,113.2 15
69.8 0.5 69.3 – – – – 11.9 987.7 987.7 – 4.4 1,110.4 22
22.8 1.6 21.2 – – – – 13.0 987.0 987.0 – 4.4 1,107.0 29
21.7 0.5 21.2 – – – – 8.8 974.4 974.4 – 4.4 1,125.9 Apr. 5
21.6 0.4 21.2 – – – – 9.1 975.0 975.0 – 4.4 1,115.2 12
21.6 0.4 21.2 – – 0.0 – 9.9 973.4 973.4 – 4.4 1,100.7 19
22.3 1.1 21.2 – – 0.0 – 11.6 974.8 974.8 – 4.4 1,087.3 26
21.8 0.5 21.3 – – – – 11.7 975.7 975.7 – 4.4 1,119.3 May 3
21.6 0.3 21.3 – – – – 8.4 977.3 977.3 – 4.4 1,133.4 10
21.6 0.3 21.3 – – – – 7.0 964.3 964.3 – 4.4 1,131.7 17
21.7 0.4 21.3 – – – – 11.1 965.0 965.0 – 4.4 1,145.3 24
22.4 1.1 21.3 – – – – 11.2 965.8 965.8 – 4.4 1,108.2 31
21.7 0.4 21.3 – – – – 11.0 965.1 965.1 – 4.4 1,123.3 June 7

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
18•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
2. Liabilities *
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to
monetary policy operations denominated in euroLiabilities to
other euro area residents
denominated in euro
As at
reporting
date 
Total
liabilitiesBanknotes
in circu-
lation  1 TotalCurrent
accounts
(covering
the
minimum
reserve
system)Deposit
facilityFixed-
term
depositsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsDeposits
related to
margin
callsOther
liabilities
to euro 
area credit
institutions
deno-
minated
in euroDebt
certifi-
cates
issued TotalGeneral
govern-
mentOther
liabilities
Eurosystem 3
2023 Nov. 17 7,001.1 1,547.9 3,726.7 162.6 3,564.1 – – 0.0 37.5 – 280.2 202.0 78.2
24 6,995.8 1,547.2 3,706.3 157.0 3,549.3 – – 0.0 37.4 – 289.4 210.3 79.1
Dec. 1 7,002.0 1,549.8 3,722.2 163.0 3,559.2 – – 0.0 36.1 – 267.1 184.2 83.0
8 6,993.5 1,554.3 3,732.4 165.6 3,566.8 – – 0.0 36.9 – 257.2 173.1 84.1
15 6,987.4 1,556.6 3,725.2 191.5 3,533.7 – – 0.0 36.2 – 259.8 177.5 82.3
22 6,899.2 1,565.1 3,649.6 204.0 3,445.6 – – 0.0 40.1 – 232.5 145.0 87.5
29 6,935.5 1,567.7 3,508.9 174.0 3,334.8 – – 0.0 58.9 – 303.9 212.8 91.1
2024 Jan. 5 6,919.8 1,561.6 3,679.9 139.7 3,540.1 – – 0.0 40.0 – 239.9 158.8 81.1
12 6,923.7 1,553.6 3,703.5 136.3 3,567.2 – – 0.0 37.5 – 239.2 161.6 77.6
19 6,889.3 1,548.8 3,666.6 162.3 3,504.3 – – 0.0 35.7 – 259.9 181.5 78.5
26 6,887.6 1,545.5 3,678.6 174.2 3,504.3 – – 0.0 36.3 – 257.0 178.9 78.0
Feb. 2 6,865.4 1,545.2 3,676.9 167.8 3,509.1 – – 0.0 33.8 – 239.2 162.3 76.9
9 6,861.4 1,544.3 3,655.9 153.8 3,502.0 – – 0.0 33.7 – 257.6 182.7 74.9
16 6,842.7 1,543.3 3,640.2 153.9 3,486.2 – – 0.0 32.0 – 264.3 187.4 76.9
23 6,830.9 1,541.7 3,678.6 154.5 3,524.0 – – 0.0 31.7 – 231.0 155.4 75.6
Mar. 1 6,820.0 1,542.7 3,657.1 163.1 3,493.9 – – 0.0 33.3 – 228.4 150.6 77.8
8 6,813.2 1,543.4 3,662.1 198.0 3,464.1 – – 0.0 33.1 – 229.9 148.2 81.6
15 6,815.6 1,542.9 3,660.0 156.3 3,503.8 – – 0.0 35.1 – 234.2 149.3 84.9
22 6,810.0 1,543.8 3,675.2 150.7 3,524.5 – – 0.0 35.6 – 212.3 135.2 77.1
29 6,619.7 1,550.3 3,379.5 169.7 3,209.8 – – 0.0 37.5 – 226.1 142.6 83.6
Apr. 5 6,585.3 1,547.8 3,392.0 161.7 3,230.3 – – 0.0 33.3 – 219.1 140.7 78.3
12 6,596.7 1,546.4 3,416.7 185.5 3,231.2 – – 0.0 31.3 – 205.3 127.0 78.3
19 6,593.2 1,546.2 3,415.2 170.0 3,245.2 – – 0.0 31.9 – 201.1 119.4 81.7
26 6,598.9 1,548.6 3,416.3 153.7 3,262.6 – – 0.0 32.1 – 204.7 123.9 80.8
May 3 6,582.1 1,553.2 3,391.0 153.2 3,237.9 – – 0.0 32.9 – 197.5 118.3 79.3
10 6,581.0 1,553.3 3,399.0 152.6 3,246.3 – – 0.0 31.9 – 194.3 115.1 79.2
17 6,562.4 1,552.9 3,376.8 152.0 3,224.8 – – 0.0 32.4 – 195.9 117.3 78.6
24 6,577.7 1,551.2 3,372.8 151.9 3,220.9 – – 0.0 33.7 – 201.7 120.2 81.5
31 6,560.7 1,553.4 3,322.2 168.7 3,153.5 – – 0.0 36.3 – 210.6 131.8 78.8
June 7 6,541.6 1,553.8 3,350.0 196.9 3,153.1 – – – 33.4 – 199.9 106.1 93.9
Deutsche Bundesbank
2023 Nov. 17 2,513.2 372.7 1,205.5 40.4 1,165.0 – – 0.0 6.9 – 34.2 18.9 15.3
24 2,522.1 372.4 1,221.3 39.9 1,181.4 – – 0.0 7.6 – 28.8 13.3 15.5
Dec. 1 2,511.5 372.8 1,207.9 42.8 1,165.0 – – 0.0 7.3 – 31.5 15.5 16.1
8 2,536.1 374.6 1,232.8 42.5 1,190.3 – – 0.0 7.3 – 30.7 15.8 14.9
15 2,512.8 376.2 1,191.5 59.6 1,131.9 – – 0.0 5.7 – 45.3 31.1 14.2
22 2,490.5 378.9 1,173.8 54.2 1,119.6 – – 0.0 6.6 – 35.1 18.5 16.6
29 2,536.2 377.0 1,109.9 53.0 1,056.8 – – 0.0 14.5 – 44.4 26.0 18.5
2024 Jan. 5 2,501.5 381.5 1,189.7 38.5 1,151.2 – – 0.0 8.9 – 37.4 22.5 14.9
12 2,513.7 379.6 1,200.0 37.1 1,162.9 – – 0.0 8.9 – 30.4 17.2 13.2
19 2,483.0 378.8 1,174.7 39.0 1,135.7 – – 0.0 6.6 – 29.6 17.4 12.2
26 2,497.5 377.8 1,182.8 51.5 1,131.2 – – 0.0 7.2 – 28.5 15.6 12.9
Feb. 2 2,512.4 379.1 1,206.7 46.2 1,160.5 – – 0.0 5.5 – 29.5 17.2 12.4
9 2,508.1 379.8 1,203.6 41.9 1,161.6 – – 0.0 5.8 – 29.3 17.3 12.0
16 2,518.7 379.8 1,214.8 40.4 1,174.4 – – 0.0 5.2 – 31.9 20.6 11.3
23 2,500.9 379.4 1,221.1 40.6 1,180.5 – – 0.0 5.2 – 26.0 15.2 10.8
Mar. 1 2,504.7 378.1 1,225.2 43.1 1,182.1 – – 0.0 5.2 – 27.5 16.2 11.3
8 2,496.1 379.0 1,219.4 60.4 1,159.0 – – 0.0 5.3 – 25.1 13.1 12.0
15 2,481.0 379.0 1,204.6 45.3 1,159.3 – – 0.0 6.7 – 26.6 15.1 11.5
22 2,478.2 379.6 1,198.2 40.0 1,158.1 – – 0.0 6.7 – 26.0 15.1 10.9
29 2,447.7 379.8 1,141.0 45.0 1,095.9 – – 0.0 8.3 – 29.1 16.0 13.1
Apr. 5 2,448.6 379.2 1,154.1 40.4 1,113.7 – – 0.0 6.8 – 29.2 18.0 11.3
12 2,439.1 379.3 1,146.2 58.0 1,088.1 – – 0.0 5.4 – 31.8 20.1 11.6
19 2,423.9 379.6 1,131.7 43.8 1,087.8 – – 0.0 5.1 – 28.2 15.5 12.7
26 2,413.4 380.5 1,119.4 40.6 1,078.8 – – 0.0 5.4 – 31.0 19.9 11.1
May 3 2,446.6 380.8 1,160.5 41.9 1,118.6 – – 0.0 5.4 – 23.8 11.9 11.9
10 2,458.4 381.6 1,171.6 39.5 1,132.0 – – 0.0 4.9 – 22.9 12.0 10.9
17 2,442.2 382.2 1,151.9 38.5 1,113.4 – – 0.0 4.6 – 23.3 11.7 11.6
24 2,461.4 381.5 1,169.8 38.3 1,131.4 – – 0.0 4.6 – 24.3 11.7 12.6
31 2,425.5 380.6 1,122.8 43.4 1,079.5 – – 0.0 5.5 – 29.5 16.9 12.6
June 7 2,439.1 380.9 1,149.7 63.1 1,086.6 – – – 5.1 – 22.9 11.8 11.2
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet items
for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at marketrates at the end of the quarrter.  1 In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen
by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of
the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthy basis. The
counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an "Intra-Eurosystem liability related to

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
19•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Liabilities
to non-euro
area residents
denominated
in euroLiabilities
to euro area
residents
in foreign
currency TotalDeposits,
balances
and other
liabilitiesLiabilities
arising
from the
credit facility
under ERM IICounterpart
of special
drawing
rights allocated
by the IMFOther
liabilities  2Intra-
Eurosystem
liability
related to
euro
banknote
issue  1 
 
 
 
 
Revaluation
accountsCapital
and
reservesAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 3
227.1 16.2 3.9 3.9 – 180.7 256.6 – 604.2 120.2 2023 Nov. 17
233.8 16.1 4.8 4.8 – 180.7 255.7 – 604.2 120.2 24
237.3 15.9 4.8 4.8 – 180.7 263.8 – 604.2 120.2 Dec. 1
233.2 16.6 4.3 4.3 – 180.7 253.4 – 604.2 120.2 8
232.7 17.3 4.2 4.2 – 180.7 250.2 – 604.2 120.2 15
229.7 18.0 4.5 4.5 – 180.7 254.6 – 604.2 120.2 22
281.9 16.4 4.5 4.5 – 177.1 260.9 – 635.1 120.2 29
193.7 17.6 3.5 3.5 – 177.1 251.1 – 635.1 120.3 2024 Jan. 5
186.3 17.9 3.4 3.4 – 177.1 249.8 – 635.0 120.3 12
186.5 17.2 2.3 2.3 – 177.1 239.9 – 635.0 120.3 19
185.9 17.0 1.8 1.8 – 177.1 233.3 – 634.8 120.3 26
192.5 17.3 1.7 1.7 – 177.1 226.7 – 634.9 120.1 Feb. 2
189.9 17.6 2.3 2.3 – 177.1 228.0 – 634.9 120.1 9
187.0 17.5 2.9 2.9 – 177.1 235.8 – 634.9 107.6 16
190.6 17.4 3.7 3.7 – 177.1 218.9 – 634.9 105.2 23
197.2 16.8 4.4 4.4 – 177.1 222.8 – 634.9 105.3 Mar. 1
191.6 17.0 3.6 3.6 – 177.1 215.2 – 634.9 105.3 8
189.1 17.1 3.9 3.9 – 177.1 215.9 – 634.9 105.3 15
188.1 16.4 4.9 4.9 – 177.1 216.4 – 634.9 105.3 22
199.5 15.9 6.4 6.4 – 178.5 221.8 – 702.9 101.1 29
180.9 16.2 5.2 5.2 – 178.5 208.4 – 702.9 101.1 Apr. 5
183.7 16.6 5.7 5.7 – 178.5 208.4 – 702.9 101.1 12
184.4 15.6 6.6 6.6 – 178.5 210.7 – 702.9 100.0 19
183.6 15.5 7.2 7.2 – 178.5 209.6 – 702.9 99.9 26
196.6 15.6 6.4 6.4 – 178.5 207.5 – 702.9 99.9 May 3
194.5 14.7 6.6 6.6 – 178.5 205.4 – 702.9 99.7 10
195.7 14.9 6.4 6.4 – 178.5 206.3 – 702.9 99.7 17
203.6 15.0 6.8 6.8 – 178.5 211.8 – 702.9 99.7 24
218.9 13.8 6.7 6.7 – 178.5 217.6 – 702.9 99.7 31
195.6 14.6 6.7 6.7 – 178.5 206.4 – 702.9 99.7 June 7
Deutsche Bundesbank
77.4 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 36.7 540.2 187.4 5.5 2023 Nov. 17
75.4 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 36.8 540.2 187.4 5.5 24
74.3 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 36.7 541.3 187.4 5.5 Dec. 1
72.8 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 36.9 541.3 187.4 5.5 8
76.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 37.1 541.3 187.4 5.5 15
77.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 37.2 541.3 187.4 5.5 22
161.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 45.7 37.3 543.7 197.1 5.5 29
75.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 45.7 23.2 536.7 197.1 5.5 2024 Jan. 5
71.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 45.7 38.5 536.7 197.1 5.5 12
69.4 0.0 0.1 0.1 – 45.7 38.6 536.7 197.1 5.5 19
71.7 0.0 0.1 0.1 – 45.7 39.1 541.9 197.1 5.5 26
68.7 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 45.7 38.3 536.2 197.1 5.5 Feb. 2
65.9 0.0 0.5 0.5 – 45.7 38.5 536.2 197.1 5.5 9
61.9 0.0 1.0 1.0 – 45.7 39.5 536.2 197.1 5.5 16
63.9 0.0 1.5 1.5 – 45.7 21.5 536.2 197.1 3.2 23
61.4 0.0 1.3 1.3 – 45.7 21.4 538.6 197.1 3.2 Mar. 1
60.6 0.0 0.7 0.7 – 45.7 21.4 538.6 197.1 3.2 8
57.3 0.0 0.7 0.7 – 45.7 21.6 538.6 197.1 3.2 15
60.9 0.0 0.5 0.5 – 45.7 21.8 538.6 197.1 3.2 22
61.2 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 46.1 20.5 541.5 216.6 3.2 29
50.9 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 46.1 20.6 541.5 216.6 3.2 Apr. 5
47.7 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 46.1 20.9 541.5 216.6 3.2 12
50.0 0.0 1.1 1.1 – 46.1 20.9 541.5 216.6 3.2 19
48.0 0.0 0.7 0.7 – 46.1 21.0 541.5 216.6 3.2 26
46.0 0.0 0.5 0.5 – 46.1 20.4 543.3 216.6 3.2 May 3
47.3 0.0 0.5 0.5 – 46.1 20.5 543.3 216.6 3.2 10
49.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 46.1 21.9 543.3 216.6 3.2 17
50.1 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 46.1 21.5 543.3 216.6 3.2 24
53.6 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 46.1 21.5 545.7 216.6 3.2 31
46.8 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 46.1 21.7 545.7 216.6 3.2 June 7
euro banknote issue". The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on an monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the eurobanknotes allocated to the NCB according to the aforementioned accounting
procedure and the value of euro banknotes put into circulation is also disclosed as an
"Intra-Eurosystem claim/liability related to banknote issue".  2 For the Deutsche Bundes-
bank: including DEM banknotes still in circulation.  3 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
20•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Assets
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the 
to banks in the home country to banks in other Member States to non-banks in the home country 
Enterprises and house- 
holds   
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1Cash
in hand Total Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Total Total Loans
End of year or month 
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2018 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2019 8,311.0 43.4 2,230.1 1,759.8 1,493.5 266.3 470.4 327.6 142.8 4,020.1 3,584.9 3,168.7 2,864.9
2020 8,943.3 47.5 2,622.7 2,177.9 1,913.5 264.4 444.8 307.1 137.7 4,179.6 3,709.8 3,297.0 2,993.1
2021 9,172.2 49.7 2,789.6 2,333.0 2,069.6 263.4 456.6 324.4 132.2 4,350.4 3,860.4 3,468.8 3,147.6
2022 10,517.9 20.0 2,935.2 2,432.2 2,169.2 263.0 502.9 359.6 143.3 4,584.6 4,079.3 3,702.9 3,365.4
2023 10,321.0 18.7 2,884.4 2,349.7 2,081.8 267.9 534.7 374.6 160.1 4,651.2 4,109.2 3,729.7 3,395.7
2022 July 10,267.9 42.3 3,086.0 2,557.4 2,291.5 266.0 528.6 396.8 131.8 4,528.3 4,008.2 3,627.9 3,293.6
Aug. 10,627.2 23.6 3,166.4 2,625.3 2,359.2 266.1 541.1 409.1 132.0 4,555.4 4,039.2 3,664.4 3,331.1
Sep. 11,063.0 20.7 3,268.0 2,714.2 2,442.2 272.0 553.7 419.7 134.0 4,579.6 4,057.2 3,685.0 3,351.1
Oct. 11,036.0 20.0 3,259.8 2,696.8 2,424.2 272.6 563.0 416.3 146.7 4,591.1 4,077.8 3,699.7 3,365.9
Nov. 10,762.4 19.1 3,180.1 2,630.6 2,360.1 270.5 549.5 403.2 146.2 4,610.5 4,089.4 3,715.1 3,379.3
Dec. 10,517.9 20.0 2,935.2 2,432.2 2,169.2 263.0 502.9 359.6 143.3 4,584.6 4,079.3 3,702.9 3,365.4
2023 Jan. 10,585.0 18.2 3,085.7 2,550.5 2,288.2 262.3 535.1 383.8 151.4 4,600.1 4,080.1 3,706.1 3,372.3
Feb. 10,760.9 18.0 3,085.7 2,541.4 2,274.9 266.5 544.3 390.6 153.8 4,614.2 4,094.2 3,714.7 3,381.3
Mar. 10,553.8 17.9 3,041.3 2,497.8 2,229.3 268.4 543.5 391.2 152.3 4,620.6 4,094.7 3,718.2 3,386.0
Apr. 10,564.3 18.9 3,047.7 2,507.0 2,237.3 269.7 540.7 384.5 156.2 4,630.5 4,096.8 3,721.7 3,390.4
May 10,653.7 18.2 3,091.2 2,550.3 2,279.7 270.6 541.0 383.4 157.5 4,642.2 4,103.4 3,733.0 3,400.9
June 10,577.7 17.7 2,967.0 2,434.5 2,166.3 268.2 532.5 371.5 161.0 4,646.7 4,108.0 3,734.5 3,397.1
July 10,743.2 17.2 3,002.4 2,456.4 2,188.8 267.6 546.0 384.8 161.2 4,651.1 4,114.5 3,738.2 3,402.0
Aug. 10,735.3 17.5 2,994.8 2,455.6 2,187.1 268.4 539.2 377.9 161.4 4,649.4 4,111.7 3,733.9 3,400.6
Sep. 10,737.5 18.0 2,916.4 2,371.6 2,106.3 265.3 544.8 382.8 162.0 4,649.8 4,113.1 3,735.7 3,401.7
Oct. 10,797.9 17.5 2,980.6 2,430.9 2,165.6 265.3 549.7 387.7 162.1 4,653.7 4,116.8 3,736.3 3,401.6
Nov. 10,610.8 16.9 2,987.1 2,438.4 2,168.4 270.0 548.7 386.5 162.2 4,666.3 4,123.1 3,740.9 3,406.9
Dec. 10,321.0 18.7 2,884.4 2,349.7 2,081.8 267.9 534.7 374.6 160.1 4,651.2 4,109.2 3,729.7 3,395.7
2024 Jan. 10,454.3 16.3 2,979.1 2,420.8 2,144.5 276.3 558.2 394.5 163.7 4,665.4 4,113.3 3,729.2 3,393.3
Feb. 10,584.8 16.3 3,012.3 2,441.5 2,160.1 281.4 570.8 406.8 163.9 4,675.8 4,120.6 3,736.2 3,399.3
Mar. 10,509.6 17.6 2,957.6 2,389.6 2,105.8 283.8 568.1 403.0 165.1 4,695.4 4,126.2 3,741.0 3,401.3
Apr. 10,598.6 16.6 2,959.1 2,382.9 2,097.2 285.7 576.3 412.4 163.8 4,690.1 4,127.5 3,741.6 3,402.0
Changes 3
2015 –191.4 0.3 –18.2 –12.1 66.1 –78.2 – 6.1 6.6 –12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 –16.8 –58.1 – 49.2 – 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.0
2017 8.0 6.1 135.9 165.0 182.6 –17.6 –29.1 – 19.6 – 9.5 51.3 63.5 114.8 101.1
2018 101.8 8.5 –29.2 –49.7 –53.4 3.7 20.6 13.0 7.6 78.7 71.9 118.1 127.8
2019 483.4 2.8 20.7 – 3.8 – 2.3 – 1.5 24.5 16.9 7.5 161.8 130.5 148.2 140.9
2020 769.5 4.1 505.4 524.2 512.6 11.6 –18.8 – 16.2 – 2.6 161.0 130.0 132.3 132.2
2021 207.2 2.2 161.3 155.6 156.4 – 0.8 5.7 11.7 – 5.9 175.7 154.6 173.7 155.9
2022 1,170.5 –29.7 149.5 103.7 100.5 3.2 45.8 33.1 12.7 242.4 223.1 237.5 220.6
2023 –133.8 – 1.3 –41.5 –76.2 –86.2 10.0 34.7 17.2 17.5 84.5 44.6 40.5 41.3
2022 Aug. 359.0 –18.7 83.5 71.7 70.7 1.0 11.8 11.3 0.4 28.1 31.4 36.5 37.5
Sep. 428.4 – 2.9 99.8 88.6 82.4 6.2 11.3 9.0 2.3 27.0 17.2 19.5 18.7
Oct. –19.3 – 0.7 – 6.7 –17.0 –17.7 0.6 10.3 – 2.4 12.7 12.4 21.1 15.3 15.5
Nov. –245.9 – 0.9 –75.9 –65.0 –63.0 – 2.0 –10.9 – 10.5 – 0.5 21.4 13.0 17.1 15.1
Dec. –225.1 0.9 –240.0 –196.2 –189.2 – 7.1 –43.8 – 41.2 – 2.6 –24.0 – 8.4 – 9.9 –11.6
2023 Jan. 87.5 – 1.8 155.0 122.2 119.3 2.8 32.8 24.0 8.9 22.8 6.5 8.1 8.0
Feb. 167.0 – 0.2 – 0.8 – 9.1 –13.4 4.3 8.3 5.8 2.5 13.4 13.6 7.9 8.3
Mar. –195.2 – 0.1 –42.8 –43.2 –45.0 1.8 0.4 1.9 – 1.5 8.2 2.0 5.0 6.2
Apr. 16.7 1.0 7.7 9.8 8.1 1.7 – 2.1 – 6.0 3.9 11.0 3.0 4.2 5.1
May 91.9 – 0.7 41.9 42.2 41.3 0.9 – 0.2 – 1.6 1.3 12.3 6.8 11.5 10.6
June –65.9 – 0.5 –121.0 –113.5 –112.5 – 1.1 – 7.5 – 11.0 3.5 4.7 5.5 2.5 – 1.7
July 170.6 – 0.5 34.6 22.2 22.7 – 0.6 12.4 12.2 0.2 6.0 7.6 4.7 5.8
Aug. –15.1 0.3 – 7.6 – 1.1 – 1.9 0.8 – 6.5 – 6.6 0.1 – 0.5 – 2.4 – 3.9 – 1.0
Sep. 1.6 0.6 –78.5 –83.9 –80.8 – 3.1 5.3 4.7 0.7 1.6 2.3 2.7 2.0
Oct. 68.3 – 0.5 64.7 59.5 59.5 0.0 5.1 5.1 0.1 5.1 4.6 1.5 0.9
Nov. –174.8 – 0.6 8.2 7.9 3.2 4.7 0.3 0.3 0.0 13.7 7.3 6.4 7.2
Dec. –286.4 1.8 –102.9 –89.1 –86.8 – 2.3 –13.8 – 11.6 – 2.2 –13.7 –12.3 –10.1 –10.1
2024 Jan. 123.8 – 2.4 90.9 68.6 61.1 7.6 22.3 18.9 3.3 15.1 5.4 0.8 0.1
Feb. 132.1 0.0 33.5 20.9 15.7 5.3 12.5 12.3 0.2 11.2 7.4 7.3 6.3
Mar. –75.2 1.3 –55.0 –52.0 –54.3 2.4 – 3.0 – 3.9 0.9 20.1 6.2 5.5 2.8
Apr. 91.3 – 1.1 1.9 – 6.5 – 8.4 1.9 8.4 9.5 – 1.0 – 3.3 2.0 1.5 1.3
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.  1 See
footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
21•
IV. Banks
euro area
to non-banks in other Member States 
Claims on non-euro area
residents
 
  
General governmentEnterprises and
households 
General government
 
Securities Total Loans 
Securities  2Total Totalof which:
Loans Total Loans 
Securities Totalof which:
LoansOther
assets  1 Period
End of year or month
276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016
308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 2017
297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2 2018
303.8 416.2 254.7 161.6 435.2 312.6 199.0 122.6 29.4 93.2 1,035.8 777.5 981.5 2019
303.9 412.8 252.3 160.5 469.8 327.5 222.2 142.3 29.7 112.7 1,003.2 751.2 1,090.3 2020
321.2 391.6 245.1 146.5 490.1 362.7 244.0 127.4 28.4 99.0 1,094.2 853.3 888.3 2021
337.5 376.4 248.0 128.4 505.3 384.9 270.2 120.4 30.8 89.6 1,137.2 882.9 1,841.0 2022
334.0 379.5 254.3 125.2 542.0 411.1 283.5 130.9 28.4 102.5 1,134.5 876.1 1,632.3 2023
334.3 380.3 245.8 134.5 520.2 383.8 266.0 136.4 33.4 103.0 1,199.9 941.5 1,411.5 2022 July
333.3 374.8 243.4 131.4 516.2 387.1 268.6 129.1 33.7 95.4 1,211.7 952.6 1,670.0 Aug.
333.9 372.2 244.5 127.7 522.4 390.5 273.1 132.0 35.4 96.6 1,220.9 961.0 1,973.8 Sep.
333.8 378.1 246.0 132.1 513.3 385.7 268.4 127.6 34.4 93.2 1,234.2 975.7 1,930.8 Oct.
335.9 374.2 246.3 127.9 521.1 394.0 276.5 127.1 32.7 94.4 1,224.6 963.4 1,728.1 Nov.
337.5 376.4 248.0 128.4 505.3 384.9 270.2 120.4 30.8 89.6 1,137.2 882.9 1,841.0 Dec.
333.8 374.0 250.3 123.7 520.1 393.5 280.2 126.6 30.2 96.4 1,161.9 904.0 1,719.2 2023 Jan.
333.5 379.5 248.2 131.3 520.0 393.3 279.2 126.8 31.3 95.4 1,167.6 904.4 1,875.3 Feb.
332.2 376.5 248.9 127.6 526.0 397.5 275.7 128.4 30.9 97.5 1,168.5 902.6 1,705.4 Mar.
331.2 375.1 250.9 124.2 533.7 405.8 280.9 128.0 32.3 95.7 1,149.9 883.9 1,717.3 Apr.
332.1 370.5 249.8 120.7 538.7 407.7 284.6 131.0 31.9 99.1 1,177.7 912.0 1,724.4 May
337.4 373.4 248.7 124.7 538.7 403.1 279.6 135.6 31.0 104.5 1,150.6 886.7 1,795.7 June
336.2 376.4 252.1 124.3 536.6 407.3 282.8 129.3 30.7 98.7 1,156.3 895.0 1,916.3 July
333.3 377.9 249.5 128.4 537.7 404.5 282.9 133.2 31.1 102.1 1,157.7 899.2 1,915.9 Aug.
334.1 377.4 252.0 125.4 536.7 404.7 282.5 132.0 32.0 100.0 1,163.8 902.7 1,989.5 Sep.
334.7 380.5 255.1 125.4 537.0 405.6 282.9 131.4 32.0 99.4 1,165.8 909.5 1,980.1 Oct.
334.0 382.2 254.4 127.8 543.2 412.1 288.2 131.1 30.9 100.2 1,153.0 895.0 1,787.6 Nov.
334.0 379.5 254.3 125.2 542.0 411.1 283.5 130.9 28.4 102.5 1,134.5 876.1 1,632.3 Dec.
335.9 384.2 256.3 127.9 552.0 414.9 287.1 137.1 28.8 108.3 1,167.8 911.4 1,625.8 2024 Jan.
336.9 384.5 254.8 129.6 555.2 420.3 293.8 134.9 28.5 106.4 1,205.6 942.8 1,674.7 Feb.
339.7 385.2 257.2 128.0 569.2 426.8 294.6 142.5 28.1 114.4 1,211.2 942.8 1,627.7 Mar.
339.7 385.8 259.9 126.0 562.7 422.4 294.1 140.3 28.8 111.4 1,218.3 947.2 1,714.5 Apr.
Changes 3
11.5 – 3.9 – 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 – 3.7 – 1.0 – 2.8 –88.3 –101.0 –150.1 2015
7.8 –35.4 –12.1 –23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 – 4.2 – 0.9 – 3.3 51.4 55.0 –51.4 2016
13.7 –51.3 –22.8 –28.5 –12.2 – 3.4 4.0 – 8.7 0.1 – 8.9 –12.3 – 6.7 –173.1 2017
– 9.8 –46.2 –19.1 –27.0 6.8 18.2 18.6 –11.4 – 1.5 – 9.9 29.0 18.9 14.8 2018
7.3 –17.7 – 8.6 – 9.1 31.3 29.5 26.9 1.7 0.0 1.7 –32.1 –33.3 330.3 2019
0.2 – 2.4 – 1.7 – 0.7 31.0 30.6 20.9 0.3 – 0.4 0.7 – 9.7 – 8.2 108.8 2020
17.8 –19.1 – 6.1 –13.1 21.1 35.5 22.6 –14.3 – 1.1 –13.2 71.7 84.9 –203.7 2021
16.9 –14.4 1.9 –16.3 19.3 20.7 24.4 – 1.4 2.6 – 3.9 15.0 – 0.8 793.3 2022
– 0.9 4.1 6.4 – 2.3 39.9 28.3 15.1 11.7 – 2.4 14.1 42.6 34.1 –218.1 2023
– 1.0 – 5.1 – 2.3 – 2.8 – 3.3 3.4 2.5 – 6.7 0.4 – 7.0 7.2 6.5 258.9 2022 Aug.
0.8 – 2.4 1.1 – 3.5 9.9 3.3 4.0 6.6 1.7 4.8 0.7 0.1 303.7 Sep.
– 0.3 5.9 1.4 4.4 – 8.7 – 4.4 – 4.6 – 4.3 – 1.0 – 3.3 19.7 20.4 –44.0 Oct.
2.0 – 4.1 0.0 – 4.1 8.4 9.2 9.6 – 0.8 – 1.7 0.9 8.8 4.8 –199.3 Nov.
1.8 1.5 0.9 0.6 –15.6 – 9.3 – 6.2 – 6.4 – 1.9 – 4.5 –75.0 –69.5 112.9 Dec.
0.1 – 1.6 2.3 – 3.9 16.3 9.4 10.0 6.9 – 0.6 7.5 33.4 27.8 –121.8 2023 Jan.
– 0.4 5.6 – 2.0 7.7 – 0.2 – 0.7 – 1.4 0.5 1.1 – 0.7 – 1.7 – 6.6 156.4 Feb.
– 1.2 – 3.0 0.8 – 3.7 6.1 4.6 – 3.0 1.5 – 0.4 1.9 9.6 6.5 –170.1 Mar.
– 1.0 – 1.2 2.1 – 3.3 8.0 8.5 5.4 – 0.5 1.4 – 1.9 –14.9 –15.4 11.9 Apr.
0.9 – 4.7 – 1.2 – 3.5 5.4 2.1 3.9 3.4 – 0.4 3.7 28.3 28.1 10.1 May
4.2 3.0 – 1.1 4.1 – 0.9 – 5.5 – 5.9 4.6 – 0.9 5.5 – 9.4 – 8.3 60.3 June
– 1.2 3.0 3.4 – 0.4 – 1.7 4.4 3.4 – 6.1 – 0.3 – 5.7 10.3 12.6 120.4 July
– 2.8 1.5 – 2.6 4.1 1.9 – 1.9 1.0 3.8 0.5 3.4 – 5.1 – 1.9 – 2.2 Aug.
0.7 – 0.3 2.6 – 2.9 – 0.7 0.4 – 0.3 – 1.1 0.9 – 2.0 6.6 3.7 71.3 Sep.
0.7 3.0 3.1 – 0.0 0.5 1.1 0.5 – 0.5 0.0 – 0.6 3.9 8.3 – 5.0 Oct.
– 0.8 0.9 – 1.5 2.4 6.4 6.7 5.8 – 0.3 – 1.2 0.9 – 3.0 – 5.3 –193.1 Nov.
– 0.1 – 2.2 0.7 – 2.8 – 1.4 – 0.9 – 4.4 – 0.5 – 2.5 2.0 –15.2 –15.5 –156.4 Dec.
0.7 4.6 2.0 2.6 9.7 3.5 3.4 6.2 0.4 5.8 25.3 27.8 – 5.1 2024 Jan.
1.0 0.1 – 1.7 1.8 3.9 6.0 7.4 – 2.1 – 0.3 – 1.8 38.2 31.8 49.2 Feb.
2.7 0.7 2.4 – 1.6 13.9 6.4 1.0 7.6 – 0.4 7.9 5.4 – 0.2 –47.1 Mar.
0.1 0.6 2.6 – 2.0 – 5.3 – 3.8 – 0.3 – 1.5 0.7 – 2.2 7.1 4.2 86.6 Apr.
of equalisation claims.  3 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures
(see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
22•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Liabilities
€ billion
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area   Deposits of banks (MFIs)
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks 
of banks
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1 Totalin the
home
countryin other
Member
States Total Total 
Overnight Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Total 
Overnight
End of year or month 
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2018 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2019 8,311.0 1,242.8 1,010.4 232.4 3,778.1 3,649.8 2,230.9 843.7 261.7 575.1 540.5 116.3 54.6
2020 8,943.3 1,493.2 1,237.0 256.3 4,021.6 3,836.7 2,508.4 767.8 227.1 560.5 533.2 135.1 57.0
2021 9,172.2 1,628.6 1,338.6 289.9 4,129.9 3,931.8 2,649.3 721.3 203.9 561.2 537.1 153.8 70.7
2022 10,517.9 1,618.6 1,231.6 387.0 4,343.5 4,093.8 2,712.1 848.6 353.7 533.2 510.2 180.5 84.1
2023 10,321.0 1,489.3 1,099.9 389.4 4,419.1 4,174.5 2,530.0 1,198.7 693.4 445.9 395.3 186.3 75.9
2022 July 10,267.9 1,772.1 1,383.3 388.9 4,267.6 4,041.3 2,722.8 765.6 259.2 552.9 530.7 179.5 99.0
Aug. 10,627.2 1,785.7 1,403.5 382.2 4,322.0 4,089.0 2,760.7 777.8 272.2 550.5 528.3 185.0 103.0
Sep. 11,063.0 1,814.5 1,415.7 398.8 4,342.6 4,105.7 2,748.5 812.0 306.6 545.2 523.1 191.1 102.4
Oct. 11,036.0 1,837.4 1,419.0 418.4 4,359.6 4,122.0 2,741.6 838.3 334.6 542.1 519.8 190.0 92.4
Nov. 10,762.4 1,773.7 1,345.0 428.7 4,401.0 4,132.6 2,752.4 843.3 344.7 536.8 514.3 193.1 97.3
Dec. 10,517.9 1,618.6 1,231.6 387.0 4,343.5 4,093.8 2,712.1 848.6 353.7 533.2 510.2 180.5 84.1
2023 Jan. 10,585.0 1,642.4 1,231.2 411.2 4,392.0 4,124.2 2,706.4 895.1 397.6 522.7 498.8 188.7 94.3
Feb. 10,760.9 1,633.5 1,226.0 407.5 4,391.4 4,113.2 2,670.6 926.7 428.4 515.9 490.8 191.2 97.2
Mar. 10,553.8 1,618.0 1,210.4 407.6 4,368.3 4,092.1 2,625.3 959.7 462.3 507.2 480.5 197.9 98.8
Apr. 10,564.3 1,632.8 1,227.7 405.1 4,370.1 4,099.8 2,620.9 980.3 482.3 498.6 470.4 199.5 93.6
May 10,653.7 1,622.7 1,229.8 392.9 4,384.2 4,108.2 2,613.0 1,004.7 504.1 490.6 460.2 201.6 97.9
June 10,577.7 1,530.6 1,149.6 381.0 4,378.1 4,110.1 2,586.3 1,040.5 541.1 483.3 450.2 196.6 90.9
July 10,743.2 1,563.0 1,159.8 403.2 4,382.4 4,116.2 2,569.6 1,070.7 572.0 475.9 439.9 197.0 90.2
Aug. 10,735.3 1,549.2 1,162.1 387.0 4,388.3 4,124.6 2,555.7 1,101.4 603.4 467.5 428.7 191.6 87.5
Sep. 10,737.5 1,500.0 1,112.7 387.3 4,384.5 4,126.8 2,545.8 1,119.2 620.4 461.8 420.1 193.4 89.5
Oct. 10,797.9 1,530.0 1,132.1 398.0 4,398.0 4,135.1 2,528.3 1,151.4 653.5 455.4 410.8 198.1 88.2
Nov. 10,610.8 1,547.2 1,136.6 410.5 4,414.1 4,158.1 2,538.2 1,171.5 670.5 448.3 400.3 197.0 89.8
Dec. 10,321.0 1,489.3 1,099.9 389.4 4,419.1 4,174.5 2,530.0 1,198.7 693.4 445.9 395.3 186.3 75.9
2024 Jan. 10,454.3 1,538.7 1,125.8 412.8 4,411.2 4,162.0 2,484.1 1,238.6 733.2 439.4 386.3 189.6 81.6
Feb. 10,584.8 1,553.3 1,134.8 418.5 4,408.0 4,160.5 2,466.4 1,259.7 753.8 434.4 378.9 191.6 82.1
Mar. 10,509.6 1,495.3 1,083.4 411.9 4,436.4 4,186.1 2,467.5 1,288.2 781.6 430.3 373.2 191.5 82.7
Apr. 10,598.6 1,520.0 1,094.3 425.7 4,435.2 4,186.3 2,464.0 1,296.6 788.3 425.7 367.7 191.5 84.1
Changes 4
2015 –191.4 –62.1 –50.3 –11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 –37.0 –10.1 –11.3 4.2 – 0.4 – 0.3
2016 184.3 –31.6 – 2.2 –29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 –11.1 1.4 – 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.9
2017 8.0 30.6 14.8 15.8 124.2 107.7 145.8 –32.5 –15.3 – 5.6 1.5 16.4 5.8
2018 101.8 –20.1 –25.7 5.6 112.4 114.7 137.7 –18.8 – 6.5 – 4.3 1.2 – 4.3 2.3
2019 483.4 12.6 –10.0 22.6 132.1 120.0 154.1 –30.6 – 6.6 – 3.4 – 0.6 10.6 8.7
2020 769.5 340.0 317.0 23.0 244.9 188.4 277.6 –74.7 –34.9 –14.5 – 7.2 18.7 1.8
2021 207.2 133.4 103.4 30.0 107.3 96.2 141.4 –45.8 –23.3 0.6 3.9 16.6 13.6
2022 1,170.5 –15.6 –105.9 90.3 208.9 165.9 60.6 132.8 148.1 –27.5 –26.3 18.4 12.8
2023 –133.8 –133.9 –138.4 4.5 89.6 93.4 –172.3 347.9 338.5 –82.3 –109.9 7.1 – 7.1
2022 Aug. 359.0 15.5 23.0 – 7.5 53.6 47.1 37.2 12.4 12.9 – 2.4 – 2.4 5.3 3.8
Sep. 428.4 25.2 11.7 13.5 19.0 15.4 –13.3 34.0 34.1 – 5.3 – 5.3 5.6 – 0.9
Oct. –19.3 24.2 3.8 20.3 17.2 16.2 – 7.3 26.6 28.2 – 3.1 – 3.3 – 0.7 – 9.7
Nov. –245.9 –60.3 –73.0 12.7 45.6 21.3 14.3 12.2 10.1 – 5.3 – 5.4 – 3.2 5.4
Dec. –225.1 –152.7 –112.7 –40.0 –55.4 –37.3 –39.2 5.6 9.4 – 3.7 – 4.1 –11.9 –12.8
2023 Jan. 87.5 23.3 0.0 23.3 49.1 30.9 –10.4 46.7 44.0 – 5.5 – 6.4 8.2 10.1
Feb. 167.0 –10.3 – 5.6 – 4.7 – 1.8 –11.8 –36.4 31.3 30.7 – 6.7 – 7.9 2.1 2.7
Mar. –195.2 –13.4 –14.7 1.3 –21.7 –20.0 –44.1 32.8 33.5 – 8.7 –10.3 7.1 1.8
Apr. 16.7 15.5 17.5 – 1.9 2.4 8.1 – 4.1 20.8 20.2 – 8.6 –10.1 1.8 – 5.1
May 91.9 –10.1 2.1 –12.1 13.1 8.4 – 7.9 24.3 21.7 – 8.0 –10.2 1.1 4.2
June –65.9 –90.3 –79.4 –11.0 – 6.3 1.5 –26.3 35.0 36.1 – 7.3 – 9.9 – 4.7 – 6.9
July 170.6 31.5 10.4 21.1 4.9 6.5 –16.4 30.2 31.0 – 7.3 –10.3 0.6 – 0.7
Aug. –15.1 –13.3 2.8 –16.1 6.4 7.9 –13.6 30.0 30.7 – 8.5 –11.2 – 4.4 – 2.4
Sep. 1.6 –49.2 –49.4 0.2 – 3.9 2.2 – 9.9 17.8 17.3 – 5.7 – 8.6 1.8 1.9
Oct. 68.3 30.9 19.9 11.0 13.8 8.5 –17.4 32.3 33.1 – 6.4 – 9.4 4.7 – 1.2
Nov. –174.8 18.9 5.1 13.8 17.5 23.9 10.6 20.4 17.2 – 7.1 –10.5 – 0.7 2.1
Dec. –286.4 –67.4 –47.2 –20.3 16.0 27.3 3.4 26.4 23.1 – 2.5 – 5.0 –10.5 –13.8
2024 Jan. 123.8 48.2 25.6 22.5 – 8.9 –13.2 –46.4 39.8 39.6 – 6.5 – 9.1 3.0 5.5
Feb. 132.1 14.8 9.0 5.8 – 3.2 – 1.5 –17.7 21.1 20.7 – 5.0 – 7.3 2.0 0.4
Mar. –75.2 –57.9 –51.4 – 6.6 28.4 25.6 1.2 28.5 27.8 – 4.1 – 5.7 – 0.1 0.6
Apr. 91.3 24.7 11.0 13.7 – 1.1 0.2 – 4.2 9.0 7.3 – 4.6 – 5.5 – 0.0 1.4
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.
1 See footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Excluding deposits of central governments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
23•
IV. Banks
  Debt securities issued  3
in other Member States  2 Deposits of
central governments
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Totalof which:
domestic
central
govern-
mentsLiabilities
arising
from
repos with
non-banks
in the
euro areaMoney
market
fund
shares
issued  3 Totalof which:
with
maturities
of up to
2 years  3Liabilities
to non-
euro 
area
residentsCapital
and
reservesOther
Liabilities  1 Period
End of year or month
42.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 2016
63.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 2017
56.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7 2018
59.0 16.5 2.7 2.4 12.0 11.2 1.5 1.9 1,063.2 32.3 559.4 728.6 935.6 2019
75.6 30.6 2.6 2.3 49.8 48.6 9.4 2.5 1,056.9 21.2 617.6 710.8 1,031.3 2020
80.7 22.8 2.4 2.2 44.2 43.5 2.2 2.3 1,110.8 27.5 757.2 732.3 809.0 2021
94.3 32.4 2.2 2.0 69.2 66.8 3.4 2.7 1,185.1 40.8 800.4 747.2 1,817.1 2022
108.4 37.8 2.0 1.6 58.3 52.0 5.0 3.2 1,279.0 80.5 723.0 784.8 1,617.7 2023
78.1 23.2 2.3 2.1 46.8 44.0 4.2 2.5 1,177.1 35.9 926.6 743.6 1,374.2 2022 July
79.7 24.3 2.3 2.1 47.9 44.0 4.8 2.4 1,183.7 38.6 950.2 741.8 1,636.6 Aug.
86.4 31.2 2.3 2.1 45.9 43.3 3.2 2.5 1,203.3 45.8 987.2 758.0 1,951.6 Sep.
95.4 39.7 2.2 2.1 47.6 44.9 4.0 2.6 1,202.6 39.4 980.8 751.8 1,897.2 Oct.
93.5 31.3 2.2 2.0 75.4 71.1 4.7 2.6 1,202.3 42.2 939.7 747.3 1,691.1 Nov.
94.3 32.4 2.2 2.0 69.2 66.8 3.4 2.7 1,185.1 40.8 800.4 747.2 1,817.1 Dec.
92.3 30.4 2.2 2.0 79.1 73.8 3.9 2.5 1,205.2 47.4 890.6 728.9 1,719.6 2023 Jan.
91.8 30.0 2.2 1.9 87.0 82.5 5.0 2.4 1,221.5 55.6 901.8 724.9 1,880.4 Feb.
97.0 28.5 2.1 1.9 78.2 73.3 4.7 2.6 1,231.2 64.6 863.1 734.8 1,731.0 Mar.
103.7 33.9 2.1 1.9 70.8 65.9 5.4 2.8 1,235.3 67.3 856.2 735.7 1,726.0 Apr.
101.6 30.7 2.1 1.8 74.4 62.4 6.0 2.6 1,257.3 72.3 888.2 746.9 1,745.8 May
103.6 32.5 2.0 1.8 71.4 64.0 4.8 2.6 1,253.9 75.7 853.4 749.6 1,804.7 June
104.8 33.2 2.0 1.7 69.2 61.5 6.5 2.9 1,262.0 76.3 855.0 757.2 1,914.3 July
102.0 32.4 2.0 1.7 72.2 61.5 5.8 3.0 1,271.3 83.5 840.0 765.2 1,912.5 Aug.
102.0 32.6 2.0 1.7 64.3 60.0 4.9 3.0 1,280.7 82.6 825.8 765.1 1,973.5 Sep.
107.9 37.8 2.0 1.6 64.8 59.7 6.2 2.9 1,288.5 84.7 843.9 755.9 1,972.3 Oct.
105.2 34.5 2.0 1.6 59.1 55.1 6.6 3.0 1,286.3 83.6 805.3 769.5 1,778.8 Nov.
108.4 37.8 2.0 1.6 58.3 52.0 5.0 3.2 1,279.0 80.5 723.0 784.8 1,617.7 Dec.
106.1 35.6 1.9 1.6 59.5 50.5 9.1 3.3 1,304.0 83.0 775.3 756.5 1,656.1 2024 Jan.
107.6 39.2 1.9 1.5 55.9 49.5 10.0 3.3 1,316.2 83.3 831.9 749.6 1,712.5 Feb.
106.8 37.5 1.9 1.5 58.8 49.9 9.1 3.5 1,320.0 82.7 834.2 756.2 1,655.0 Mar.
105.4 35.7 1.9 1.5 57.4 49.2 9.5 3.7 1,324.7 77.1 821.8 747.0 1,736.7 Apr.
Changes 4
– 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 – 0.4 – 1.9 – 1.0 – 0.0 –86.8 7.7 –30.3 28.0 –143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 2.2 – 1.2 – 0.3 – 1.1 8.6 – 1.3 116.1 26.4 –39.5 2016
10.8 4.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.1 – 0.3 – 3.3 – 8.5 –16.1 34.1 –162.3 2017
– 6.4 – 4.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 2.1 2.1 – 2.6 0.3 30.0 – 5.9 –36.0 7.4 10.3 2018
2.0 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.1 1.4 1.4 5.6 – 0.5 22.3 0.1 –47.9 30.0 329.1 2019
17.0 14.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 37.8 37.3 3.6 0.6 11.8 – 9.3 61.6 – 1.5 108.5 2020
3.1 – 8.0 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 5.5 – 5.0 – 7.9 0.3 40.6 6.9 124.9 16.6 –207.9 2021
5.8 8.5 – 0.3 – 0.2 24.6 23.0 1.2 0.4 67.2 12.6 45.6 5.0 857.7 2022
14.4 6.7 – 0.2 – 0.4 –10.9 –14.8 1.8 0.5 110.6 43.1 –55.7 43.3 –189.9 2023
1.6 1.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.1 0.0 0.6 – 0.1 4.1 2.7 20.1 – 3.1 268.3 2022 Aug.
6.5 6.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.0 – 0.7 – 1.6 0.1 15.8 7.0 31.8 14.9 323.1 Sep.
9.1 8.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.7 1.6 0.8 0.1 1.8 – 6.3 – 2.8 – 5.3 –55.3 Oct.
– 8.6 – 8.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 27.5 25.8 0.8 0.0 7.4 2.4 –29.9 – 1.1 –208.4 Nov.
1.0 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 6.3 – 4.3 – 1.3 0.1 –11.5 – 1.2 –132.1 1.9 125.9 Dec.
– 1.9 – 1.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 9.9 6.9 0.5 – 0.2 22.4 6.6 95.0 –17.6 –85.0 2023 Jan.
– 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 7.9 8.7 1.2 – 0.1 13.0 8.1 6.9 – 5.0 163.2 Feb.
5.3 – 1.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 8.8 – 9.2 – 0.3 0.3 13.6 9.2 –33.8 11.2 –151.2 Mar.
6.9 5.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 7.4 – 7.4 0.7 0.1 5.7 2.7 – 4.9 1.8 – 4.7 Apr.
– 3.1 – 3.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 3.6 – 3.5 0.6 – 0.1 23.4 6.5 32.0 9.4 23.5 May
2.1 2.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 3.0 1.6 – 1.1 – 0.0 0.4 4.1 –28.3 3.6 56.2 June
1.2 0.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.1 – 2.5 1.7 0.3 10.2 0.7 4.2 8.1 109.7 July
– 2.1 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 2.9 – 0.0 – 0.7 0.1 7.0 7.1 –18.9 7.2 – 2.8 Aug.
– 0.1 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 7.9 – 1.5 – 0.9 0.1 10.3 0.0 –14.2 – 1.0 60.4 Sep.
5.9 5.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.6 – 0.3 1.4 – 0.1 8.3 2.2 19.1 – 4.6 – 0.4 Oct.
– 2.8 – 3.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 5.7 – 4.6 0.4 0.1 2.0 – 1.0 –32.8 14.8 –195.8 Nov.
3.3 3.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.8 – 3.1 – 1.6 0.1 – 5.6 – 3.0 –80.1 15.3 –163.0 Dec.
– 2.5 – 2.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.2 – 1.5 4.1 0.1 21.1 2.4 48.0 –29.3 40.5 2024 Jan.
1.5 3.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 3.6 – 1.0 0.8 0.0 12.5 0.2 56.7 – 6.4 57.0 Feb.
– 0.7 – 1.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 2.9 0.5 – 0.9 0.2 3.6 – 0.6 2.0 6.6 –57.1 Mar.
– 1.4 – 2.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 1.4 – 0.8 0.4 0.2 5.0 – 5.3 –12.4 – 9.5 83.9 Apr.
3 In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money
market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published togetherwith money market fund shares.  4 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
24•
IV. Banks
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Loans
End of
monthNumber of
reporting
institu-
tionsBalance
sheet
total  1Cash in
hand and
credit
balances
with
central
banks TotalBalances
and
loansSecurities
issued by
banks Totalfor
up to and
including
1 yearfor
more than
1 year BillsSecurities
issued by
non-banksPartici-
pating
interestsOther
assets  1
All categories of banks
2023 Nov. 1,334 10,674.4 62.9 3,566.2 3,076.8 485.1 5,029.2 482.3 3,824.2 0.1 704.1 97.2 1,919.0
Dec. 1,334 10,397.8 71.2 3,447.6 2,963.8 479.9 5,004.5 453.0 3,824.2 0.1 714.1 97.3 1,777.1
2024 Jan. 1,335 10,534.7 89.9 3,537.5 3,042.7 491.0 5,033.8 476.4 3,822.3 0.1 719.0 96.8 1,776.6
Feb. 1,334 10,669.6 64.3 3,622.7 3,122.5 496.3 5,056.1 485.2 3,829.4 0.1 726.6 96.2 1,830.3
Mar. 1,333 10,597.2 65.1 3,580.4 3,074.4 502.4 5,068.9 480.5 3,829.3 0.1 743.3 96.5 1,786.4
Apr. 1,330 10,690.1 63.1 3,574.4 3,067.6 503.7 5,078.4 493.8 3,832.7 0.1 733.6 97.0 1,877.2
Commercial banks 6
2024 Mar. 240 4,889.5 22.3 1,700.5 1,605.8 94.3 1,666.6 317.2 1,056.7 0.1 284.5 29.9 1,470.1
Apr. 239 4,988.8 22.6 1,715.0 1,620.0 94.4 1,674.4 332.0 1,056.2 0.1 274.9 30.3 1,546.5
Big banks 7
2024 Mar. 3 2,424.0 10.4 691.4 653.5 37.9 773.9 161.2 450.5 0.0 159.0 24.4 923.9
Apr. 3 2,505.5 9.8 714.6 675.2 39.5 769.1 163.8 448.7 0.0 152.0 24.5 987.5
Regional banks and other commercial banks
2024 Mar. 129 1,952.6 8.5 672.0 618.7 53.0 738.2 107.8 510.9 0.1 115.5 4.7 529.2
Apr. 127 1,986.3 9.3 685.7 633.8 51.5 746.9 120.2 507.9 0.1 112.9 4.9 539.6
Branches of foreign banks
2024 Mar. 108 512.9 3.4 337.1 333.5 3.4 154.5 48.3 95.4 – 9.9 0.9 17.0
Apr. 109 497.1 3.5 314.7 311.1 3.4 158.5 48.0 99.7 – 9.9 0.9 19.5
Landesbanken
2024 Mar. 6 896.4 3.8 341.8 285.0 55.9 432.3 46.9 344.0 0.0 37.5 9.6 109.0
Apr. 6 894.6 2.2 335.4 278.3 56.7 431.5 47.1 344.2 0.0 37.5 9.6 115.9
Savings banks
2024 Mar. 354 1,547.1 20.5 265.2 144.8 120.4 1,219.3 53.9 997.4 – 167.8 16.7 25.3
Apr. 352 1,552.2 20.4 269.3 148.5 120.8 1,220.1 54.4 997.8 – 167.8 16.7 25.8
Credit cooperatives
2024 Mar. 694 1,170.7 12.8 211.6 100.8 110.7 894.4 35.7 740.7 0.0 118.1 20.3 31.6
Apr. 694 1,176.3 12.8 215.6 104.4 110.9 895.8 35.0 742.9 0.0 117.9 20.5 31.7
Mortgage banks
2024 Mar. 7 223.4 0.1 18.4 11.1 7.3 199.4 3.3 182.4 – 13.7 0.1 5.3
Apr. 7 223.4 0.1 19.3 12.0 7.3 198.4 2.9 182.0 – 13.5 0.1 5.4
Building and loan associations
2024 Mar. 14 259.0 0.2 40.9 25.3 15.6 213.9 1.2 191.7 . 21.1 0.2 3.7
Apr. 14 258.1 0.2 39.8 24.2 15.6 214.3 1.2 192.0 . 21.1 0.2 3.7
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2024 Mar. 18 1,611.3 5.5 1,002.0 901.6 98.3 443.0 22.3 316.5 0.0 100.5 19.6 141.3
Apr. 18 1,596.6 4.9 980.1 880.2 98.0 443.9 21.2 317.5 – 101.0 19.6 148.1
Memo item:    Foreign banks 8
2024 Mar. 139 2,417.8 9.9 874.2 832.8 41.0 723.5 147.1 431.3 0.1 138.0 2.8 807.5
Apr. 140 2,439.1 10.0 867.1 826.3 40.1 739.9 159.4 435.5 0.1 136.2 2.7 819.3
of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2024 Mar. 31 1,904.9 6.5 537.1 499.3 37.6 569.0 98.8 335.9 0.1 128.1 1.9 790.4
Apr. 31 1,942.0 6.5 552.3 515.3 36.7 581.4 111.4 335.9 0.1 126.2 1.9 799.9
* Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified as
MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3.  1 Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative financial
instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the meaning ofSection 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handelsgesetzbuch) read
in conjunction with Section 35 (1) number 1a of the Credit Institution Accounting
Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute) are classified
under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting date. Trading
portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Series Banking statistics, in
Tables I.1 to I.3.  2 For building and loan associations: including deposits under savings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
25•
IV. Banks
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4
TotalSight
depositsTime
deposits TotalSight
depositsfor
up to and
including
1 yearfor
more
than
1 year  2Memo
item:
Liabilities
arising
from
repos  3 Totalof which:
At 3
months'
noticeBank
savings
bondsBearer
debt
securities
out-
standing  5Capital
including
published
reserves,
partici-
pation
rights
capital,
funds for
general
banking
risksOther
liabi-
lities  1End of
month
All categories of banks
2,140.3 677.9 1,462.3 4,629.8 2,759.2 609.7 676.7 84.7 452.9 404.1 131.3 1,359.8 611.1 1,933.3 2023 Nov.
2,023.8 607.5 1,416.3 4,609.7 2,717.1 615.3 683.6 66.0 450.5 399.1 143.2 1,365.0 611.8 1,787.5 Dec.
2,105.4 675.4 1,430.0 4,625.9 2,697.1 647.0 685.4 88.1 444.0 390.0 152.5 1,379.1 611.0 1,813.2 2024 Jan.
2,160.6 695.9 1,464.7 4,639.5 2,690.2 668.5 683.4 97.3 439.0 382.6 158.4 1,386.3 610.9 1,872.3 Feb.
2,124.4 661.5 1,462.9 4,647.7 2,672.0 692.5 686.5 79.1 434.9 376.8 161.8 1,400.3 615.4 1,809.3 Mar.
2,124.0 685.4 1,438.5 4,659.1 2,682.6 695.3 685.0 90.9 430.2 371.3 166.0 1,393.5 619.0 1,894.5 Apr.
Commercial banks 6
1,145.0 503.9 641.1 1,901.3 1,161.0 354.2 246.7 77.6 86.9 58.0 52.5 213.8 212.7 1,416.7 2024 Mar.
1,143.9 525.7 618.1 1,923.7 1,176.8 361.7 246.5 89.2 86.5 56.9 52.2 218.4 214.9 1,488.0 Apr.
Big banks 7
425.6 173.9 251.7 876.6 523.1 199.4 71.5 42.0 78.7 50.6 4.0 159.5 80.1 882.3 2024 Mar.
436.4 197.3 239.1 880.0 524.1 202.8 70.9 46.6 78.4 49.6 3.9 164.0 80.1 944.9 Apr.
Regional banks and other commercial banks
464.0 193.0 271.0 806.7 495.3 102.6 152.3 35.6 8.0 7.2 48.5 52.8 115.5 513.6 2024 Mar.
471.3 216.7 254.7 821.8 508.3 105.3 152.1 42.6 7.9 7.0 48.3 52.8 117.5 522.9 Apr.
Branches of foreign banks
255.4 137.0 118.4 218.0 142.6 52.1 23.0 – 0.2 0.2 0.1 1.6 17.1 20.8 2024 Mar.
236.1 111.8 124.3 221.8 144.5 53.6 23.5 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.1 1.6 17.4 20.2 Apr.
Landesbanken
213.2 32.6 180.6 297.1 140.9 79.8 70.1 0.7 4.3 4.3 2.0 228.6 43.9 113.5 2024 Mar.
209.5 31.7 177.8 292.7 140.3 77.6 68.3 0.8 4.3 4.3 2.1 228.2 44.2 120.1 Apr.
Savings banks
157.5 5.5 152.0 1,162.8 756.3 95.9 19.5 – 208.6 189.8 82.6 23.3 141.6 61.9 2024 Mar.
156.9 5.0 151.9 1,166.3 758.4 96.0 19.8 – 205.7 186.9 86.4 23.9 141.9 63.2 Apr.
Credit cooperatives
156.1 2.6 153.5 857.4 529.5 127.0 42.1 – 134.6 124.3 24.2 9.0 105.9 42.3 2024 Mar.
156.3 2.7 153.6 861.7 531.1 129.7 42.7 – 133.3 122.8 24.8 9.1 106.3 43.0 Apr.
Mortgage banks
43.3 3.3 40.0 54.1 2.3 5.9 45.9 0.3 – – . 109.4 9.1 7.4 2024 Mar.
43.0 3.4 39.6 54.7 2.1 6.1 46.6 0.5 – – . 109.0 9.2 7.4 Apr.
Building and loan associations
37.7 3.0 34.7 193.3 4.1 2.7 186.0 – 0.4 0.4 0.1 7.0 13.0 8.0 2024 Mar.
37.3 2.5 34.7 192.5 4.0 2.8 185.2 – 0.4 0.4 0.1 7.5 13.1 7.8 Apr.
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
371.7 110.7 261.0 181.7 78.0 27.0 76.3 0.4 – – . 809.2 89.2 159.5 2024 Mar.
377.1 114.3 262.8 167.5 69.9 21.3 75.9 0.3 – – . 797.5 89.4 165.1 Apr.
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
685.1 334.8 350.2 782.3 488.2 152.2 106.7 42.2 8.2 7.8 27.0 50.9 100.7 798.8 2024 Mar.
680.0 337.3 342.7 799.7 499.9 157.9 106.9 48.7 8.0 7.6 27.0 51.6 102.8 804.9 Apr.
of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
429.7 197.8 231.8 564.2 345.6 100.1 83.7 42.2 7.9 7.6 26.9 49.4 83.6 778.0 2024 Mar.
443.9 225.5 218.4 577.9 355.4 104.3 83.4 48.7 7.7 7.4 27.0 50.0 85.5 784.7 Apr.
and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  3 Included in time deposits.  4 Excluding deposits
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2).  5 Including subordinated
negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
6 Commercial banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other
commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign banks”.  7 Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner
Bank AG (up to Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische
Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG), Deutsche Postbank AG (from December 2004 up to April2018) and DB Privat- und Firmenkundenbank AG (from May 2018) (see the explanatory
notes in the Statistical Series Banking statistics, Table I.3, banking group “Big banks “).
8 Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in other categories
of banks and the category ”Branches (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”.
9 Separate presentation of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks included in
other banking categories.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
26•
IV. Banks
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
PeriodCash in
hand
(euro area
banknotes
and
coins)Credit
balances
with the
Bundes-
bank TotalCredit
balances
and loans BillsNegotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
banksSecurities
issued by
banksMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total Loans BillsTreasury
bills and
negotiable
money mar-
ket paper
issued by
non-banksSecurities
issued
by non-
banks  1
End of year or month *
2014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2017 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
2018 40.4 416.1 1,323.5 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 239.0 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.9
2019 43.2 476.6 1,254.7 1,016.2 0.0 0.7 237.9 4.5 3,521.5 3,119.2 0.3 3.3 398.7
2020 47.2 792.9 1,367.9 1,119.7 0.0 0.7 247.5 8.8 3,647.0 3,245.1 0.2 4.0 397.7
2021 49.4 905.0 1,409.6 1,163.7 – 0.5 245.3 10.3 3,798.1 3,392.4 0.3 2.6 402.8
2022 19.8 67.3 2,347.0 2,101.4 – 1.0 244.6 12.1 4,015.6 3,613.1 0.2 2.7 399.6
2023 18.5 52.0 2,280.7 2,029.3 – 0.8 250.6 24.2 4,044.1 3,649.9 0.1 0.9 393.3
2022 Nov. 18.8 88.4 2,524.4 2,271.2 – 1.5 251.7 11.1 4,025.7 3,625.3 0.2 3.6 396.7
Dec. 19.8 67.3 2,347.0 2,101.4 – 1.0 244.6 12.1 4,015.6 3,613.1 0.2 2.7 399.6
2023 Jan. 18.0 89.5 2,443.6 2,198.1 – 1.0 244.5 12.7 4,016.2 3,622.4 0.1 4.3 389.4
Feb. 17.8 52.2 2,471.9 2,222.2 – 1.0 248.8 12.8 4,030.2 3,629.4 0.1 2.9 397.9
Mar. 17.7 53.5 2,426.8 2,175.1 – 1.0 250.7 12.6 4,030.5 3,634.7 0.1 4.3 391.4
Apr. 18.7 54.2 2,434.7 2,182.3 – 1.1 251.3 12.7 4,032.5 3,641.2 0.1 3.2 388.1
May 18.1 48.7 2,483.6 2,230.4 – 0.8 252.4 12.7 4,039.0 3,650.5 0.1 2.2 386.2
June 17.5 51.6 2,366.1 2,114.1 – 0.9 251.0 12.7 4,042.1 3,645.6 0.1 2.9 393.5
July 17.0 69.9 2,369.8 2,118.4 – 1.1 250.3 12.8 4,048.7 3,653.9 0.1 3.2 391.6
Aug. 17.3 46.7 2,392.0 2,139.7 – 1.2 251.1 12.9 4,046.7 3,649.9 0.1 2.5 394.2
Sep. 17.9 49.6 2,305.0 2,056.1 – 1.0 247.8 12.9 4,048.1 3,653.5 0.1 3.4 391.1
Oct. 17.4 62.2 2,351.7 2,102.8 – 0.8 248.0 13.1 4,051.9 3,656.6 0.1 3.0 392.2
Nov. 16.7 45.5 2,375.9 2,122.3 – 0.9 252.7 13.3 4,057.9 3,661.2 0.1 3.1 393.6
Dec. 18.5 52.0 2,280.7 2,029.3 – 0.8 250.6 24.2 4,044.1 3,649.9 0.1 0.9 393.3
2024 Jan. 16.1 73.1 2,330.7 2,070.9 – 0.8 259.0 28.1 4,048.3 3,649.5 0.0 1.4 397.4
Feb. 16.2 47.5 2,376.9 2,112.0 – 0.8 264.1 31.6 4,055.7 3,654.0 0.1 0.5 401.2
Mar. 17.5 46.9 2,325.4 2,058.2 – 0.7 266.5 34.3 4,061.0 3,658.4 0.1 0.5 402.1
Apr. 16.4 46.1 2,319.4 2,050.5 – 0.7 268.1 38.0 4,062.1 3,661.7 0.0 1.7 398.6
Changes *
2015 +0.3 + 73.7 – 80.7 – 4.3 –0.0 – 0.4 –75.9 –0.1 +68.9 +54.1 –0.0 – 0.3 +15.1
2016 +6.5 +129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 – – 0.9 –17.9 +0.4 +43.7 +62.8 –0.1 – 0.1 –18.9
2017 +6.1 +108.4 + 50.3 + 70.4 –0.0 + 0.0 –20.1 –0.1 +57.0 +70.2 +0.0 + 0.4 –13.6
2018 +8.5 + 24.0 – 81.0 – 76.6 +0.0 + 0.1 – 4.4 +3.8 +71.5 +105.4 –0.1 – 0.5 –33.2
2019 +2.8 + 59.7 – 63.0 – 61.1 –0.0 – 0.2 – 1.6 –1.4 +126.7 +129.1 +0.1 + 3.1 – 5.5
2020 +4.1 +316.4 +201.2 +191.6 –0.0 + 0.0 + 9.6 +4.3 +123.2 +123.6 –0.1 + 0.7 – 1.0
2021 +2.2 +111.8 + 44.1 + 46.3 –0.0 – 0.2 – 2.0 +1.5 +152.2 +147.8 +0.0 – 2.2 + 6.6
2022 –29.6 –836.6 +938.0 +938.1 – + 0.2 – 0.3 +1.7 +216.7 +220.1 –0.1 + 0.1 – 3.3
2023 –1.3 – 15.3 – 65.5 – 71.2 – – 0.2 + 5.9 +1.9 +30.9 +39.0 –0.1 – 1.8 – 6.2
2022 Nov. –0.8 + 1.8 – 67.6 – 65.5 – – 0.0 – 2.1 +1.1 +12.0 +13.9 –0.0 – 0.7 – 1.3
Dec. +1.0 – 19.9 –177.4 –169.9 – – 0.5 – 7.0 +1.0 – 9.6 –11.7 +0.0 – 0.9 + 2.9
2023 Jan. –1.8 + 22.2 + 96.7 + 96.7 – + 0.0 – 0.1 +0.6 + 0.6 + 9.2 –0.1 + 1.6 –10.3
Feb. –0.2 – 37.4 + 28.6 + 24.3 – + 0.0 + 4.3 +0.2 +13.3 + 6.3 –0.0 – 1.5 + 8.5
Mar. –0.1 + 1.3 – 45.1 – 47.0 – + 0.0 + 1.9 –0.1 + 0.9 + 6.0 +0.0 + 1.4 – 6.5
Apr. +1.0 + 0.7 + 7.8 + 7.2 – + 0.1 + 0.6 +0.1 + 2.1 + 6.5 +0.0 – 1.2 – 3.2
May –0.7 – 5.5 + 48.9 + 48.1 – – 0.3 + 1.1 –0.0 + 6.5 + 9.4 +0.0 – 1.0 – 1.9
June –0.5 + 2.9 –116.9 –115.7 – + 0.1 – 1.3 +0.0 + 4.4 – 3.7 –0.0 + 0.7 + 7.4
July –0.5 + 18.4 + 3.7 + 4.3 – + 0.2 – 0.8 +0.1 + 6.6 + 8.3 –0.0 + 0.2 – 1.9
Aug. +0.3 – 23.2 + 22.2 + 21.3 – + 0.1 + 0.8 +0.1 – 1.9 – 4.0 +0.0 – 0.6 + 2.7
Sep. +0.6 + 2.8 – 87.0 – 83.6 – – 0.2 – 3.3 +0.1 + 1.3 + 3.7 +0.0 + 0.9 – 3.2
Oct. –0.5 + 12.7 + 46.8 + 46.8 – – 0.2 + 0.2 +0.2 + 3.7 + 3.0 –0.0 – 0.4 + 1.1
Nov. –0.6 – 16.7 + 24.2 + 19.5 – + 0.1 + 4.6 +0.1 + 6.1 + 4.7 +0.0 + 0.1 + 1.3
Dec. +1.8 + 6.5 – 95.5 – 93.3 – – 0.1 – 2.0 +0.6 –12.7 –10.3 –0.0 – 2.2 – 0.2
2024 Jan. –2.4 + 21.1 + 48.6 + 40.3 – – 0.0 + 8.4 +3.9 + 4.0 – 0.5 –0.0 + 0.5 + 4.0
Feb. +0.0 – 25.6 + 46.3 + 41.2 – – 0.0 + 5.1 +3.4 + 6.7 + 3.7 +0.0 – 0.9 + 3.8
Mar. +1.3 – 0.6 – 51.5 – 53.8 – – 0.1 + 2.3 +2.8 + 5.3 + 4.4 +0.0 – 0.1 + 0.9
Apr. –1.1 – 0.8 – 5.9 – 7.6 – + 0.0 + 1.6 +3.7 + 1.1 + 3.3 –0.0 + 1.3 – 3.5
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange ofequalisation claims (see also footnote 2).  2 Including debt securities arising from the
exchange of equalisation claims.  3 Including liabilities arising from registered debt
securities, registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities;

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
27•
IV. Banks
Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Equalisa-
tion
claims  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loansPartici-
pating
interests
in
domestic
banks
and
enterprises TotalSight
deposits
4Time
deposits
4Redis-
counted
bills  5Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
de-
positsTime
deposits
6Savings
de-
posits  7Bank
savings
bonds  8Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
– 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
– 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
– 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016
– 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 2017
– 18.0 90.9 1,020.9 105.5 915.4 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9 2018
– 17.3 90.4 1,010.2 107.2 902.9 0.0 4.4 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 575.2 33.2 32.5 2019
– 23.5 78.3 1,236.7 125.0 1,111.6 0.0 13.1 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 560.6 28.3 34.4 2020
– 25.7 79.2 1,338.4 117.2 1,221.3 0.0 16.4 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 561.2 24.5 34.2 2021
– 25.6 80.3 1,231.6 136.9 1,094.7 0.0 15.7 4,162.0 2,720.6 873.5 533.2 34.6 35.9 2022
– 23.8 80.3 1,099.9 137.9 962.0 0.0 13.5 4,229.0 2,540.8 1,100.1 445.9 142.2 50.1 2023
– 25.9 80.2 1,345.0 135.4 1,209.6 0.0 16.1 4,205.6 2,767.9 869.3 536.9 31.5 34.8 2022 Nov.
– 25.6 80.3 1,231.6 136.9 1,094.7 0.0 15.7 4,162.0 2,720.6 873.5 533.2 34.6 35.9 Dec.
– 25.6 80.0 1,231.2 142.6 1,088.7 0.0 15.6 4,199.7 2,722.8 913.5 522.7 40.6 36.9 2023 Jan.
– 25.6 80.2 1,226.0 140.7 1,085.3 0.0 15.6 4,197.1 2,687.7 947.9 516.0 45.5 37.2 Feb.
– 24.6 80.3 1,210.4 137.0 1,073.4 0.0 15.2 4,167.4 2,639.8 968.6 507.2 51.7 36.4 Mar.
– 24.7 80.9 1,227.7 140.8 1,086.9 0.0 15.2 4,167.3 2,632.0 978.5 498.6 58.3 36.5 Apr.
– 24.7 81.1 1,229.8 137.8 1,091.9 0.0 15.1 4,172.9 2,623.9 993.0 490.6 65.4 36.6 May
– 24.4 81.2 1,149.6 134.0 1,015.6 0.0 14.6 4,176.3 2,600.9 1,020.0 483.3 72.1 36.5 June
– 24.4 81.0 1,159.8 134.8 1,025.0 0.0 14.6 4,180.2 2,582.2 1,042.9 475.9 79.1 36.7 July
– 24.4 80.3 1,162.1 138.5 1,023.7 0.0 14.5 4,188.4 2,568.4 1,061.7 467.5 90.7 36.9 Aug.
– 24.2 80.4 1,112.7 137.4 975.3 0.0 14.1 4,189.3 2,558.0 1,072.5 461.8 97.0 37.1 Sep.
– 24.1 80.3 1,132.1 136.7 995.4 0.0 14.0 4,198.0 2,544.5 1,086.5 455.4 111.6 37.3 Oct.
– 24.0 80.6 1,136.6 140.0 996.7 0.0 14.0 4,217.3 2,552.9 1,085.6 448.3 130.5 37.6 Nov.
– 23.8 80.3 1,099.9 137.9 962.0 0.0 13.5 4,229.0 2,540.8 1,100.1 445.9 142.2 50.1 Dec.
– 23.7 80.3 1,125.8 155.3 970.5 0.0 13.4 4,216.3 2,496.8 1,128.7 439.4 151.4 54.5 2024 Jan.
– 23.7 80.1 1,134.8 161.4 973.4 0.0 13.3 4,213.6 2,478.3 1,143.5 434.4 157.3 57.5 Feb.
– 23.5 80.3 1,083.4 159.4 924.0 0.0 12.8 4,239.0 2,479.2 1,168.8 430.3 160.7 60.2 Mar.
– 23.4 80.8 1,094.3 160.6 933.8 0.0 12.7 4,239.6 2,475.4 1,173.6 425.8 164.8 63.7 Apr.
Changes *
– –2.1 –4.3 –46.6 + 3.3 –50.0 +0.0 –1.3 +106.5 +156.2 –28.3 –11.3 –10.1 –1.6 2015
– –1.3 +1.5 – 1.7 + 0.3 – 2.0 +0.0 –0.5 +104.7 +124.5 – 6.9 – 7.9 –5.0 –0.5 2016
– –0.0 –1.6 +11.0 –18.4 +29.4 –0.0 –0.5 +103.1 +142.8 –27.5 – 5.6 –6.7 +0.4 2017
– –1.0 +3.1 –25.0 – 3.1 –21.9 +0.0 –0.4 +117.7 +139.3 –10.8 – 4.3 –6.5 +3.9 2018
– –0.7 +0.1 – 8.6 + 1.6 –10.2 +0.0 –0.3 +122.5 +155.8 –25.7 – 3.4 –4.1 –1.4 2019
– +5.7 –3.3 +313.4 +23.2 +290.2 –0.0 +8.2 +221.6 +273.7 –32.7 –14.5 –4.9 +1.9 2020
– +2.3 +1.0 +105.2 – 7.4 +112.6 +0.0 +3.3 +95.3 +144.3 –46.2 + 0.7 –3.5 –0.2 2021
– –0.1 +1.7 –104.6 + 8.8 –113.4 –0.0 –0.6 +191.8 +65.8 +143.4 –27.5 +10.1 +1.7 2022
– –1.2 +0.6 –139.9 – 8.9 –131.0 ±0.0 –2.3 +76.6 –172.0 +226.4 –82.3 +104.5 +3.5 2023
– +0.1 –0.1 –73.9 – 2.6 –71.3 –0.0 –0.1 +45.3 +20.9 +26.3 – 5.3 +3.4 +1.3 2022 Nov.
– –0.3 +0.1 –113.2 – 8.5 –104.7 –0.0 –0.4 –43.4 –47.1 + 4.2 – 3.7 +3.2 +1.1 Dec.
– –0.0 –0.4 – 0.3 + 5.8 – 6.1 +0.0 –0.1 +37.6 – 2.9 +40.0 – 5.5 +6.0 +1.0 2023 Jan.
– –0.0 +0.2 – 5.2 – 1.9 – 3.4 – –0.0 – 2.5 –35.0 +34.4 – 6.7 +4.8 +0.4 Feb.
– –0.3 +0.1 –15.2 – 3.7 –11.5 – –0.4 –29.6 –47.3 +20.2 – 8.7 +6.2 –0.1 Mar.
– +0.0 +1.1 +17.3 + 3.8 +13.5 –0.0 –0.0 – 0.1 – 7.9 + 9.8 – 8.6 +6.6 +0.0 Apr.
– +0.0 +0.2 + 2.1 – 3.0 + 5.0 –0.0 –0.1 + 5.6 – 7.9 +14.5 – 8.0 +7.1 +0.1 May
– –0.4 +0.1 –79.7 – 3.7 –76.0 +0.0 –0.5 + 2.3 –23.0 +26.0 – 7.3 +6.7 –0.1 June
– +0.0 –0.1 +10.2 + 0.8 + 9.4 – –0.0 + 3.8 –18.7 +22.8 – 7.3 +7.0 +0.2 July
– +0.1 –0.8 + 3.1 + 3.9 – 0.8 +0.0 –0.1 + 8.2 –13.2 +21.3 – 8.5 +8.5 +0.2 Aug.
– –0.2 +0.1 –49.4 – 1.1 –48.3 –0.0 –0.4 + 0.9 –10.5 +10.7 – 5.7 +6.3 +0.2 Sep.
– –0.1 –0.1 +19.9 – 0.7 +20.6 –0.0 –0.1 + 8.7 –13.4 +14.0 – 6.4 +14.6 +0.3 Oct.
– –0.1 +0.3 + 4.6 + 3.3 + 1.3 +0.0 –0.0 +19.3 + 8.5 – 1.0 – 7.1 +18.8 +0.3 Nov.
– –0.2 –0.2 –47.3 –12.5 –34.8 –0.0 –0.5 +22.3 – 0.7 +13.7 – 2.5 +11.8 +1.2 Dec.
– –0.1 –0.1 +26.0 +17.4 + 8.6 +0.0 –0.1 –12.7 –44.1 +28.7 – 6.5 +9.2 +4.4 2024 Jan.
– –0.0 –0.2 + 8.9 + 6.1 + 2.9 –0.0 –0.1 – 2.8 –18.4 +14.8 – 5.0 +5.9 +3.0 Feb.
– –0.2 +0.3 –51.4 – 1.9 –49.5 – –0.5 +25.5 + 0.9 +25.3 – 4.1 +3.4 +2.6 Mar.
– –0.1 +0.4 +11.0 + 1.2 + 9.8 – –0.1 + 0.6 – 3.8 + 4.8 – 4.6 +4.2 +3.5 Apr.
including subordinated liabilities.  4 Including liabilities arising from monetary policy
operations with the Bundesbank.  5 Own acceptances and promissory notes
outstanding.  6 Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999,including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  7 Excluding
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8).  8 Including liabilities
arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
28•
IV. Banks
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Credit balances and loans, bills Loans and bills
PeriodCash in
hand
(non-
euro area
banknotes
and
coins) Total TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termNegotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
banksSecurities
issued by
banksMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termTreasury
bills and
negotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
non-banksSecurities
issued by
non-banks
End of year or month *
2014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2017 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
2018 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.1
2019 0.2 1,064.2 814.0 532.7 281.3 1.8 248.5 3.7 795.3 513.1 111.0 402.1 7.7 274.5
2020 0.2 1,024.3 784.8 532.1 252.8 2.6 236.8 4.0 822.8 523.0 125.4 397.5 11.3 288.5
2021 0.3 1,100.7 877.5 614.7 262.7 0.4 222.8 3.5 871.2 572.2 151.5 420.7 8.0 290.9
2022 0.2 1,151.3 926.6 656.2 270.4 1.7 223.0 3.7 913.7 616.2 173.0 443.2 14.9 282.6
2023 0.2 1,166.9 934.7 652.0 282.7 3.1 229.2 6.1 960.4 627.3 174.9 452.4 12.3 320.8
2022 Nov. 0.2 1,273.7 1,043.2 766.3 276.9 2.9 227.6 3.5 938.8 631.7 187.5 444.2 12.5 294.6
Dec. 0.2 1,151.3 926.6 656.2 270.4 1.7 223.0 3.7 913.7 616.2 173.0 443.2 14.9 282.6
2023 Jan. 0.2 1,195.3 963.1 700.1 263.0 2.7 229.5 4.0 941.0 633.6 190.9 442.7 20.1 287.3
Feb. 0.2 1,201.5 965.7 701.9 263.8 2.9 232.9 4.2 946.4 635.5 190.5 444.9 15.8 295.1
Mar. 0.2 1,203.8 968.2 704.1 264.0 2.9 232.7 4.3 953.0 630.8 187.8 443.0 12.5 309.8
Apr. 0.2 1,184.1 946.5 681.7 264.8 3.6 234.0 4.2 959.3 633.6 191.7 441.9 13.9 311.8
May 0.2 1,211.3 972.8 706.0 266.8 3.4 235.1 4.2 965.1 638.1 193.4 444.7 14.6 312.4
June 0.2 1,177.3 939.1 681.7 257.4 3.6 234.6 4.3 961.8 628.4 181.4 447.0 15.8 317.6
July 0.2 1,194.1 955.3 694.8 260.5 4.1 234.7 4.3 962.7 637.4 190.4 447.0 16.4 308.9
Aug. 0.2 1,197.1 959.5 693.8 265.7 3.7 233.9 4.3 954.8 630.9 181.3 449.6 16.2 307.8
Sep. 0.2 1,203.3 966.5 687.9 278.6 3.5 233.3 4.2 958.8 633.0 183.8 449.2 16.1 309.7
Oct. 0.2 1,212.3 975.9 689.7 286.2 3.6 232.8 4.2 956.8 635.7 188.7 447.0 14.6 306.5
Nov. 0.2 1,190.3 954.5 674.0 280.5 3.3 232.4 4.2 971.3 645.4 194.5 450.9 15.3 310.6
Dec. 0.2 1,166.9 934.7 652.0 282.7 3.1 229.2 6.1 960.4 627.3 174.9 452.4 12.3 320.8
2024 Jan. 0.2 1,206.8 971.9 684.9 287.0 2.8 232.0 6.1 985.5 649.3 196.9 452.4 14.6 321.6
Feb. 0.2 1,245.8 1,010.7 724.3 286.4 3.0 232.2 6.9 1,000.4 660.7 204.4 456.3 14.2 325.4
Mar. 0.2 1,255.0 1,016.4 732.9 283.5 2.7 236.0 7.0 1,007.9 651.5 191.9 459.6 15.3 341.2
Apr. 0.2 1,255.0 1,017.2 729.5 287.7 2.2 235.6 7.4 1,016.3 664.8 206.3 458.5 16.5 335.0
Changes *
2015 +0.1 –91.8 –86.0 –82.2 –3.8 –6.7 +0.8 –0.1 –6.1 –9.2 –6.5 –2.7 + 1.1 +2.0
2016 +0.0 –25.5 –14.5 –38.2 +23.7 –0.7 –10.3 –0.0 +17.4 +28.9 +10.1 +18.8 – 3.0 –8.5
2017 +0.0 –57.2 –48.7 –61.5 +12.8 +0.0 –8.5 +0.6 –4.7 +13.0 +8.6 +4.4 + 0.7 –18.4
2018 +0.0 +49.6 +34.0 +57.7 –23.7 +0.2 +15.3 +0.7 +18.3 +28.3 +3.2 +25.2 – 0.4 –9.7
2019 –0.0 –4.1 –11.3 –21.9 +10.7 +0.8 +6.3 +0.7 +26.8 +19.9 +12.7 +7.3 + 3.0 +3.8
2020 –0.0 –32.0 –22.4 –6.6 –15.8 +0.9 –10.5 +0.3 +34.4 +14.7 +9.0 +5.7 + 3.6 +16.1
2021 +0.0 +52.8 +71.1 +68.9 +2.2 –2.5 –15.8 –0.5 +37.8 +39.7 +29.8 +9.9 – 3.2 +1.4
2022 –0.1 +21.7 +20.4 +17.9 +2.6 +1.3 –0.0 +0.2 +37.0 +37.0 +16.8 +20.2 + 6.7 –6.7
2023 –0.0 +32.6 +24.9 +10.2 +14.7 +1.4 +6.3 +0.5 +51.5 +14.8 +5.2 +9.6 – 2.6 +39.3
2022 Nov. –0.1 –9.4 –8.7 –13.4 +4.7 –0.2 –0.4 +0.1 +16.5 +9.7 +5.5 +4.2 – 0.0 +6.8
Dec. –0.0 –112.4 –106.8 –104.0 –2.8 –1.2 –4.4 +0.2 –19.9 –11.2 –12.7 +1.5 + 2.4 –11.1
2023 Jan. –0.0 +48.2 +40.6 +46.3 –5.7 +1.1 +6.5 +0.3 +30.0 +19.5 +18.6 +0.9 + 5.3 +5.2
Feb. +0.0 +0.6 –2.8 –1.2 –1.6 +0.1 +3.3 +0.2 +1.6 –1.2 –1.3 +0.1 – 4.4 +7.2
Mar. –0.0 +9.2 +9.2 +6.2 +3.0 –0.0 –0.1 +0.1 +11.2 –1.1 –1.5 +0.4 – 3.3 +15.5
Apr. +0.0 –17.0 –19.0 –20.9 +1.9 +0.7 +1.3 –0.1 +8.2 +4.4 +4.5 –0.1 + 1.5 +2.4
May +0.0 +16.9 +16.2 +18.0 –1.8 –0.2 +0.9 –0.0 +1.5 +1.4 +1.3 +0.1 + 0.6 –0.5
June +0.0 –17.7 –17.6 –9.9 –7.6 +0.2 –0.3 +0.1 –1.9 –8.7 –11.1 +2.4 + 1.2 +5.6
July –0.0 +18.4 +17.7 +13.9 +3.9 +0.5 +0.2 +0.0 +3.0 +10.5 +9.6 +0.9 + 0.7 –8.2
Aug. –0.0 +0.0 +1.3 –2.2 +3.5 –0.4 –0.9 –0.0 –10.2 –8.3 –9.8 +1.5 – 0.3 –1.6
Sep. +0.0 –1.0 –0.0 –10.1 +10.1 –0.2 –0.7 –0.0 –0.1 –1.2 +1.3 –2.5 – 0.1 +1.1
Oct. +0.0 +10.3 +10.6 +2.6 +8.0 +0.1 –0.4 –0.1 –0.7 +3.8 +5.2 –1.4 – 1.6 –3.0
Nov. – –14.4 –13.9 –11.5 –2.4 –0.2 –0.3 +0.0 +18.7 +12.9 +7.6 +5.3 + 0.8 +5.0
Dec. –0.0 –21.0 –17.6 –21.0 +3.4 –0.3 –3.2 +0.0 –9.7 –17.2 –19.2 +2.0 – 3.0 +10.5
2024 Jan. +0.0 +34.0 +31.6 +29.7 +1.9 –0.2 +2.7 –0.0 +21.4 +19.0 +21.0 –2.0 + 2.2 +0.1
Feb. –0.0 +39.2 +38.9 +39.6 –0.7 +0.1 +0.2 +0.9 +15.8 +12.3 +7.5 +4.8 – 0.3 +3.8
Mar. –0.0 +9.1 +5.6 +8.7 –3.0 –0.3 +3.8 +0.1 +7.7 –9.1 –12.5 +3.4 + 1.0 +15.7
Apr. +0.0 –2.2 –1.5 –4.7 +3.2 –0.4 –0.3 +0.4 +7.1 +12.3 +14.0 –1.6 + 1.2 –6.4
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequentrevisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
29•
IV. Banks
Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Time deposits (including bank
savings bonds)Time deposits (including
savings deposits and bank
savings bonds)
Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loansPartici-
pating
interests
in foreign
banks
and
enter-
prises TotalSight
deposits TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
deposits TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
14.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 2016
12.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 2017
11.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1 2018
11.5 21.3 680.6 339.3 341.2 243.2 98.0 – 229.8 112.3 117.4 60.5 57.0 0.1 2019
11.3 17.2 761.2 428.8 332.5 205.1 127.3 – 258.5 133.3 125.2 65.6 59.7 0.1 2020
11.1 16.6 914.6 456.0 458.6 301.5 157.2 0.0 288.2 141.9 146.2 68.7 77.6 0.1 2021
10.4 15.7 998.4 480.0 518.4 376.4 141.9 – 370.3 196.0 174.3 84.4 89.8 0.1 2022
10.7 16.7 923.8 469.5 454.3 288.1 166.2 – 380.6 176.2 204.4 104.9 99.5 1.1 2023
10.6 15.8 1,150.7 612.1 538.7 385.9 152.7 – 414.1 235.1 179.0 91.2 87.7 0.1 2022 Nov.
10.4 15.7 998.4 480.0 518.4 376.4 141.9 – 370.3 196.0 174.3 84.4 89.8 0.1 Dec.
10.4 15.6 1,089.4 601.2 488.3 344.5 143.8 – 405.1 213.5 191.5 101.9 89.6 0.2 2023 Jan.
10.4 15.8 1,086.8 600.1 486.7 345.1 141.6 – 418.4 218.4 200.0 109.9 90.1 0.2 Feb.
10.4 15.9 1,060.0 576.0 484.0 329.3 154.7 – 412.5 216.8 195.7 98.9 96.9 0.3 Mar.
10.4 15.9 1,042.6 540.6 502.0 343.8 158.2 – 423.3 208.8 214.6 116.6 97.9 0.3 Apr.
10.4 16.1 1,059.1 596.1 462.9 299.9 163.0 0.0 436.0 219.3 216.7 116.7 100.0 0.3 May
10.2 16.0 1,025.8 565.0 460.8 302.6 158.2 0.0 411.5 205.6 205.9 107.3 98.6 0.4 June
10.2 16.1 1,052.4 582.3 470.1 311.1 159.0 0.0 411.0 204.0 207.0 107.9 99.1 0.3 July
10.2 16.1 1,021.8 566.5 455.3 294.3 161.1 – 407.7 198.5 209.2 112.0 97.2 0.3 Aug.
10.2 16.1 1,006.0 536.9 469.1 293.9 175.2 – 403.9 206.3 197.6 100.2 97.4 0.4 Sep.
10.2 16.6 1,021.8 558.9 462.9 288.0 174.9 – 423.2 207.0 216.2 117.4 98.8 0.3 Oct.
10.4 16.4 1,003.7 538.0 465.7 291.0 174.6 – 412.5 206.3 206.3 107.1 99.2 0.3 Nov.
10.7 16.7 923.8 469.5 454.3 288.1 166.2 – 380.6 176.2 204.4 104.9 99.5 1.1 Dec.
10.7 16.4 979.5 520.1 459.5 284.6 174.9 – 409.6 200.3 209.3 110.6 98.6 0.7 2024 Jan.
10.7 15.9 1,025.8 534.6 491.2 311.3 179.9 0.0 425.9 211.9 214.1 117.4 96.6 2.0 Feb.
10.7 15.9 1,041.0 502.1 538.9 370.9 168.1 0.0 408.7 192.8 215.9 118.1 97.7 2.6 Mar.
10.8 16.1 1,029.6 524.9 504.8 329.8 175.0 0.0 419.4 207.2 212.3 114.6 97.7 3.2 Apr.
Changes *
– 0.6 – 6.1 –15.4 +40.6 –56.0 –48.6 – 7.4 –0.0 –26.5 –13.9 –12.6 +0.3 –13.0 –0.0 2015
– 0.1 – 1.5 +82.7 +51.0 +31.7 +27.0 + 4.7 –0.0 +3.5 –3.1 +6.7 +5.9 +0.8 –0.0 2016
– 1.0 – 4.1 –15.5 +25.2 –40.8 –43.2 + 2.4 ±0.0 +31.8 +11.0 +20.8 +15.6 +5.2 –0.4 2017
– 0.2 – 2.2 –23.9 –23.4 – 0.4 + 2.1 – 2.6 –0.0 –11.9 –0.2 –11.8 –5.7 –6.0 –0.2 2018
– 0.3 – 0.9 – 9.5 –49.4 +39.8 +28.0 +11.8 –0.0 –0.8 +2.1 –2.9 –1.8 –1.1 –0.0 2019
– 0.2 – 3.9 +83.8 +87.8 – 4.1 –34.7 +30.6 – +23.6 +13.8 +9.8 +7.1 +2.8 +0.0 2020
– 0.2 – 0.8 +136.6 +19.8 +116.8 +89.2 +27.6 +0.0 +22.7 +6.4 +16.3 +0.0 +16.3 –0.0 2021
– 0.7 – 1.0 +85.8 +29.1 +56.7 +69.6 –13.0 –0.0 +68.2 +49.0 +19.2 +13.9 +5.3 +0.0 2022
+ 0.2 + 1.1 –66.1 –4.6 –61.4 –86.9 +25.4 ±0.0 +11.6 –18.3 +29.9 +20.9 +9.0 +0.1 2023
– 0.0 – 0.0 –24.1 –41.3 +17.2 +17.4 – 0.2 –0.0 +5.3 +13.1 –7.9 –7.4 –0.5 –0.0 2022 Nov.
– 0.2 – 0.0 –145.0 –128.3 –16.7 – 6.9 – 9.8 – –40.7 –37.2 –3.5 –6.2 +2.7 –0.0 Dec.
– 0.0 – 0.1 +93.8 +122.3 –28.4 –30.8 + 2.4 – +35.9 +18.1 +17.8 +17.9 –0.1 +0.0 2023 Jan.
+ 0.0 + 0.2 – 7.0 –3.5 – 3.5 – 0.9 – 2.6 – +11.6 +4.1 +7.5 +7.2 +0.3 +0.1 Feb.
+ 0.0 + 0.2 –21.8 –21.5 – 0.3 –13.9 +13.6 – –3.9 –0.8 –3.1 –10.0 +7.0 +0.1 Mar.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 –15.3 –34.3 +19.0 +15.2 + 3.8 – +11.7 –7.7 +19.3 +18.1 +1.2 –0.0 Apr.
+ 0.0 + 0.2 +10.1 +52.6 –42.5 –46.3 + 3.8 +0.0 +9.2 +9.5 –0.3 –1.2 +0.9 –0.0 May
– 0.2 – 0.0 –26.4 –26.1 – 0.3 + 3.9 – 4.2 – –23.1 –13.1 –9.9 –8.7 –1.2 +0.1 June
– 0.0 + 0.1 +27.3 +17.2 +10.1 + 9.0 + 1.1 – +0.4 –1.3 +1.7 +1.1 +0.6 –0.0 July
+ 0.0 – 0.0 –32.6 –16.4 –16.2 –17.9 + 1.7 –0.0 –4.3 –5.9 +1.6 +3.6 –2.0 –0.0 Aug.
– 0.0 – 0.0 –21.0 –32.3 +11.4 – 2.2 +13.5 – –5.7 +7.1 –12.8 –12.8 +0.0 +0.0 Sep.
+ 0.0 + 0.5 +17.0 +22.8 – 5.8 – 5.6 – 0.2 – +19.6 +0.9 +18.7 +17.3 +1.4 –0.1 Oct.
+ 0.2 – 0.1 –12.9 –18.4 + 5.5 + 4.9 + 0.6 – –8.6 +0.6 –9.2 –9.8 +0.6 –0.0 Nov.
+ 0.3 + 0.3 –77.4 –67.0 –10.4 – 2.3 – 8.2 – –31.3 –29.7 –1.5 –1.8 +0.3 –0.0 Dec.
+ 0.0 – 0.4 +51.4 +48.7 + 2.8 – 5.2 + 8.0 – +27.8 +23.6 +4.3 +5.3 –1.0 –0.4 2024 Jan.
+ 0.0 – 0.4 +46.4 +14.5 +31.9 +26.7 + 5.2 +0.0 +16.4 +11.5 +4.9 +6.8 –1.9 +1.4 Feb.
+ 0.0 – 0.0 +15.1 –32.4 +47.6 +59.5 –11.9 – –17.3 –19.1 +1.8 +0.7 +1.1 +0.5 Mar.
+ 0.0 + 0.1 –13.1 +22.2 –35.3 –41.9 + 6.6 – +10.1 +14.1 –4.0 –4.3 +0.3 +0.7 Apr.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
30•
IV. Banks
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Short-term lending Medium- and long-term Lending to domestic
non-banks, total
to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
Periodincluding
negotiable
money market
paper, securities,
equalisation
claimsexcluding
negotiable
money market
paper, securities,
equalisation
claims Total TotalLoans
and
billsNegotiable
money
market
paper Total LoansTreasury
bills Total Total
End of year or month *
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2017 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
2018 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 – 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.8
2019 3,521.5 3,119.5 260.4 238.8 238.4 0.4 21.6 18.7 2.9 3,261.1 2,866.9
2020 3,647.0 3,245.3 243.3 221.6 221.2 0.4 21.6 18.0 3.6 3,403.8 3,013.0
2021 3,798.1 3,392.7 249.7 232.2 231.9 0.3 17.5 15.2 2.3 3,548.4 3,174.6
2022 4,015.6 3,613.3 296.4 279.8 279.4 0.4 16.7 14.3 2.3 3,719.2 3,359.9
2023 4,044.1 3,649.9 279.0 264.2 264.0 0.3 14.8 14.2 0.6 3,765.1 3,401.1
2022 Nov. 4,025.7 3,625.4 310.7 292.9 292.6 0.4 17.7 14.5 3.2 3,715.0 3,359.0
Dec. 4,015.6 3,613.3 296.4 279.8 279.4 0.4 16.7 14.3 2.3 3,719.2 3,359.9
2023 Jan. 4,016.2 3,622.5 303.2 282.5 281.9 0.5 20.7 17.0 3.8 3,713.1 3,360.2
Feb. 4,030.2 3,629.5 297.8 279.9 279.2 0.7 18.0 15.8 2.2 3,732.4 3,371.2
Mar. 4,030.5 3,634.8 305.0 285.1 284.4 0.7 19.9 16.3 3.6 3,725.5 3,369.3
Apr. 4,032.5 3,641.3 304.1 283.3 282.8 0.6 20.8 18.2 2.6 3,728.4 3,374.4
May 4,039.0 3,650.6 299.7 281.0 280.2 0.8 18.7 17.4 1.3 3,739.3 3,388.0
June 4,042.1 3,645.7 300.3 280.5 279.6 0.9 19.8 17.8 2.0 3,741.8 3,388.7
July 4,048.7 3,653.9 299.4 277.4 276.6 0.9 21.9 19.6 2.3 3,749.3 3,395.5
Aug. 4,046.7 3,650.0 289.5 270.8 270.1 0.7 18.6 16.8 1.8 3,757.2 3,398.6
Sep. 4,048.1 3,653.6 297.2 275.5 274.8 0.6 21.7 19.0 2.7 3,751.0 3,395.8
Oct. 4,051.9 3,656.7 293.6 270.9 270.3 0.6 22.7 20.3 2.4 3,758.3 3,401.0
Nov. 4,057.9 3,661.3 291.1 272.0 271.4 0.7 19.0 16.6 2.4 3,766.9 3,404.2
Dec. 4,044.1 3,649.9 279.0 264.2 264.0 0.3 14.8 14.2 0.6 3,765.1 3,401.1
2024 Jan. 4,048.3 3,649.5 281.0 263.3 262.7 0.6 17.7 16.8 0.8 3,767.3 3,401.5
Feb. 4,055.7 3,654.0 281.5 267.3 266.8 0.5 14.2 14.1 0.0 3,774.3 3,404.7
Mar. 4,061.0 3,658.5 289.2 273.3 272.6 0.7 15.9 16.1 – 0.2 3,771.8 3,403.2
Apr. 4,062.1 3,661.8 289.3 270.4 269.6 0.8 18.9 18.0 0.9 3,772.8 3,406.5
Changes *
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 – 1.3 – 0.9 – 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 – 5.2 – 0.3 – 0.4 + 0.1 – 4.9 – 4.8 – 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.8
2017 + 57.0 + 70.2 – 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 – 12.1 – 12.4 + 0.3 + 63.5 + 103.4
2018 + 71.5 + 105.3 + 6.6 + 15.8 + 15.7 + 0.1 – 9.2 – 8.6 – 0.6 + 65.0 + 102.0
2019 + 126.7 + 129.1 + 11.7 + 11.6 + 11.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 3.0 + 3.1 + 115.0 + 132.8
2020 + 123.2 + 123.6 – 19.6 – 19.8 – 19.8 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.7 + 142.8 + 145.6
2021 + 152.2 + 147.8 + 8.8 + 13.8 + 13.8 – 0.1 – 4.9 – 2.8 – 2.1 + 143.4 + 157.9
2022 + 216.7 + 220.0 + 47.6 + 48.5 + 48.5 + 0.0 – 0.9 – 0.9 + 0.0 + 169.1 + 184.8
2023 + 30.9 + 38.9 – 15.3 – 14.5 – 14.4 – 0.1 – 0.8 + 0.9 – 1.7 + 46.2 + 42.3
2022 Nov. + 12.0 + 13.9 + 2.2 + 4.4 + 4.5 – 0.1 – 2.1 – 1.5 – 0.6 + 9.7 + 11.8
Dec. – 9.6 – 11.7 – 13.9 – 12.8 – 12.7 – 0.0 – 1.1 – 0.2 – 0.9 + 4.2 + 1.8
2023 Jan. + 0.6 + 9.2 + 6.7 + 2.6 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 4.1 + 2.6 + 1.4 – 6.1 + 0.3
Feb. + 13.3 + 6.3 – 6.0 – 3.2 – 3.3 + 0.1 – 2.8 – 1.2 – 1.6 + 19.3 + 11.0
Mar. + 0.9 + 6.0 + 7.6 + 5.7 + 5.7 – 0.0 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 1.4 – 6.7 – 1.8
Apr. + 2.1 + 6.5 – 0.9 – 1.7 – 1.7 – 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.9 – 1.1 + 3.0 + 5.1
May + 6.5 + 9.4 – 4.4 – 2.3 – 2.6 + 0.3 – 2.1 – 0.8 – 1.2 + 10.9 + 13.6
June + 4.4 – 3.7 + 1.7 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 2.7 + 0.9
July + 6.6 + 8.3 – 1.0 – 3.1 – 3.1 – 0.0 + 2.1 + 1.9 + 0.2 + 7.5 + 6.9
Aug. – 1.9 – 4.0 – 9.9 – 6.6 – 6.5 – 0.2 – 3.3 – 2.8 – 0.5 + 8.0 + 3.1
Sep. + 1.3 + 3.7 + 7.7 + 4.6 + 4.7 – 0.1 + 3.1 + 2.1 + 0.9 – 6.4 – 2.9
Oct. + 3.7 + 3.0 – 3.5 – 4.6 – 4.5 – 0.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 – 0.3 + 7.2 + 5.2
Nov. + 6.1 + 4.7 – 2.3 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.1 – 3.7 – 3.7 + 0.0 + 8.4 + 3.8
Dec. – 12.7 – 10.3 – 11.0 – 7.8 – 7.4 – 0.4 – 3.2 – 1.3 – 1.8 – 1.7 – 2.9
2024 Jan. + 4.0 – 0.5 + 1.9 – 0.9 – 1.2 + 0.3 + 2.8 + 2.6 + 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.3
Feb. + 6.7 + 3.7 + 0.4 + 3.9 + 4.0 – 0.1 – 3.5 – 2.7 – 0.8 + 6.3 + 2.7
Mar. + 5.3 + 4.4 + 6.6 + 4.8 + 4.7 + 0.2 + 1.7 + 2.0 – 0.2 – 1.3 – 0.3
Apr. + 1.1 + 3.3 + 0.1 – 2.8 – 3.0 + 0.2 + 3.0 + 1.9 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 3.4
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims (see also
footnote 2).  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation
claims.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
31•
IV. Banks
lending
prises and households to general government
Loans Loans
TotalMedium-
termLong-
term SecuritiesMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total TotalMedium-
termLong-
termSecur-
ities  1Equal-
isation
claims  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
2,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 – 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 – 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 – 1.8 2016
2,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 – 1.7 2017
2,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 – 1.4 2018
2,626.4 301.3 2,325.1 240.5 15.7 394.2 235.9 17.2 218.8 158.2 – 1.5 2019
2,771.8 310.5 2,461.4 241.1 22.4 390.8 234.3 15.7 218.6 156.6 – 1.1 2020
2,915.7 314.5 2,601.2 258.9 24.7 373.8 229.9 14.3 215.6 143.9 – 1.0 2021
3,085.9 348.7 2,737.1 274.0 24.6 359.3 233.7 14.1 219.6 125.6 – 1.0 2022
3,131.7 361.0 2,770.7 269.4 22.8 364.0 240.0 14.1 225.9 124.0 – 1.0 2023
3,086.6 344.9 2,741.7 272.4 24.8 356.0 231.7 13.9 217.8 124.3 – 1.0 2022 Nov.
3,085.9 348.7 2,737.1 274.0 24.6 359.3 233.7 14.1 219.6 125.6 – 1.0 Dec.
3,090.3 349.9 2,740.4 269.9 24.6 352.9 233.4 13.8 219.5 119.5 – 1.0 2023 Jan.
3,102.0 355.3 2,746.7 269.2 24.5 361.2 232.5 13.7 218.8 128.7 – 1.1 Feb.
3,101.5 354.8 2,746.7 267.8 23.6 356.2 232.6 13.6 219.0 123.6 – 1.0 Mar.
3,107.6 355.6 2,752.0 266.8 23.6 354.0 232.7 13.9 218.8 121.2 – 1.0 Apr.
3,120.7 360.8 2,760.0 267.2 23.7 351.4 232.4 13.6 218.8 119.0 – 1.0 May
3,117.4 360.0 2,757.5 271.3 23.3 353.1 230.9 13.4 217.6 122.2 – 1.0 June
3,125.3 362.1 2,763.3 270.2 23.4 353.8 232.4 13.5 218.9 121.4 – 1.0 July
3,130.4 362.8 2,767.6 268.2 23.4 358.6 232.6 13.8 218.8 126.0 – 1.0 Aug.
3,126.8 359.5 2,767.3 269.0 23.2 355.1 233.0 13.7 219.4 122.1 – 1.0 Sep.
3,131.2 360.7 2,770.5 269.8 23.1 357.3 234.8 13.8 221.0 122.4 – 1.0 Oct.
3,135.5 361.4 2,774.1 268.7 23.0 362.7 237.8 14.1 223.8 124.8 – 1.0 Nov.
3,131.7 361.0 2,770.7 269.4 22.8 364.0 240.0 14.1 225.9 124.0 – 1.0 Dec.
3,130.5 359.5 2,771.0 271.0 22.7 365.8 239.4 13.8 225.6 126.4 – 1.0 2024 Jan.
3,132.4 357.0 2,775.4 272.3 22.7 369.6 240.7 14.1 226.6 128.9 – 1.0 Feb.
3,128.6 354.1 2,774.5 274.6 22.5 368.7 241.1 14.3 226.8 127.5 – 1.0 Mar.
3,132.3 353.4 2,779.0 274.2 22.4 366.3 241.9 14.3 227.5 124.4 – 1.0 Apr.
Changes *
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 +14.8 – 2.1 – 6.6 – 6.9 – 4.8 – 2.0 + 0.2 – + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 – 0.9 – 30.9 – 7.3 – 4.0 – 3.3 –23.6 – – 0.4 2016
+ 87.6 + 9.4 + 78.2 +15.8 + 0.1 – 39.9 –10.6 – 1.3 – 9.3 –29.4 – – 0.1 2017
+108.7 +19.3 + 89.4 – 6.7 – 0.9 – 37.1 –10.5 – 2.7 – 7.8 –26.6 – – 0.0 2018
+126.0 +18.9 +107.2 + 6.8 – 0.8 – 17.8 – 5.5 – 2.6 – 2.9 –12.3 – + 0.1 2019
+145.0 + 9.4 +135.5 + 0.6 + 6.1 – 2.8 – 1.1 – 1.5 + 0.4 – 1.7 – – 0.4 2020
+140.1 + 5.6 +134.5 +17.8 + 2.3 – 14.6 – 3.3 – 1.3 – 2.0 –11.3 – – 0.0 2021
+169.9 +33.5 +136.4 +14.9 – 0.1 – 15.7 + 2.5 – 0.7 + 3.3 –18.2 – – 0.0 2022
+ 46.9 +11.0 + 35.9 – 4.7 – 1.1 + 3.9 + 5.5 ± 0.0 + 5.5 – 1.5 – – 0.0 2023
+ 9.4 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 2.4 + 0.0 – 2.1 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 1.4 – 3.6 – + 0.0 2022 Nov.
+ 0.3 + 4.0 – 3.7 + 1.6 – 0.3 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.9 + 1.4 – – 0.0 Dec.
+ 4.4 + 1.2 + 3.3 – 4.2 + 0.0 – 6.4 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 6.1 – – 0.0 2023 Jan.
+ 11.7 + 5.4 + 6.4 – 0.7 – 0.1 + 8.3 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.7 + 9.2 – + 0.1 Feb.
– 0.4 – 0.5 + 0.0 – 1.4 – 0.3 – 4.8 + 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.3 – 5.1 – – 0.0 Mar.
+ 6.1 + 0.8 + 5.3 – 1.0 + 0.0 – 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 – 0.2 – 2.3 – + 0.0 Apr.
+ 13.2 + 5.2 + 8.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 – 2.7 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 2.3 – – 0.0 May
– 3.2 – 1.3 – 2.0 + 4.1 – 0.3 + 1.8 – 1.5 – 0.2 – 1.2 + 3.2 – – 0.0 June
+ 8.0 + 1.8 + 6.2 – 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 1.3 – 0.8 – – 0.0 July
+ 5.1 + 0.8 + 4.3 – 2.0 + 0.1 + 4.8 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.1 + 4.6 – – 0.0 Aug.
– 3.6 – 3.3 – 0.2 + 0.7 – 0.2 – 3.5 + 0.4 – 0.2 + 0.6 – 3.9 – – 0.0 Sep.
+ 4.4 + 1.1 + 3.2 + 0.8 – 0.1 + 2.1 + 1.8 + 0.2 + 1.6 + 0.3 – – 0.0 Oct.
+ 4.8 + 0.2 + 4.6 – 1.1 – 0.1 + 4.7 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 2.0 + 2.4 – + 0.0 Nov.
– 3.5 – 0.4 – 3.2 + 0.7 – 0.2 + 1.1 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 1.9 – 0.9 – – 0.0 Dec.
– 1.3 – 1.4 + 0.1 + 1.6 – 0.1 + 1.8 – 0.6 – 0.3 – 0.3 + 2.4 – + 0.0 2024 Jan.
+ 1.4 – 2.5 + 4.0 + 1.3 – + 3.5 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 2.5 – – 0.0 Feb.
– 2.6 – 2.5 – 0.1 + 2.3 – 0.2 – 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 1.4 – + 0.0 Mar.
+ 3.7 – 0.8 + 4.5 – 0.4 – 0.1 – 2.4 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.7 – 3.1 – + 0.0 Apr.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
32•
IV. Banks
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
billion €
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios)  1
of which:
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
Period TotalMortgage
loans,
total TotalMortgage
loans
secured
by
residen-
tial real
estateOther
housing
loans Totalof which:
Housing
loansManufac-
turingElectricity,
gas and
water
supply;
refuse
disposal,          
mining
and
quarryingConstruc-
tionWhole-
sale and
retail
trade;
repair of
motor                
vehicles
and
motor-
cyclesAgri-
culture,
forestry,
fishing
and
aqua-
cultureTransport-
ation and
storage;
post and                      
telecom-
munica-
tionsFinancial
intermedi-
ation
(excluding
MFIs) and
insurance   
com-
panies
Lending, total                                                 End of year or quarter *
2021 3,147.5 1,591.4 1,678.2 1,373.0 305.2 1,701.5 477.2 146.1 128.3 98.0 140.4 55.9 55.6 186.3
2023 Q1 3,385.9 1,687.3 1,779.0 1,457.3 321.7 1,872.4 512.9 162.8 138.1 110.9 157.5 56.1 63.1 222.8
Q2 3,397.0 1,701.4 1,787.6 1,471.4 316.3 1,879.4 517.7 162.6 137.7 112.5 159.2 56.3 61.9 221.5
Q3 3,401.6 1,735.7 1,797.1 1,505.7 291.5 1,878.2 522.3 160.0 134.7 113.3 159.5 56.4 61.3 223.0
Q4 3,395.7 1,740.5 1,801.7 1,512.0 289.7 1,872.8 525.7 154.6 136.1 113.3 160.2 56.0 61.5 218.1
2024 Q1 3,401.2 1,753.5 1,802.8 1,524.4 278.5 1,879.2 527.2 155.3 138.3 113.5 159.4 56.3 58.7 219.4
Short-term lending
2021 231.8 . 6.9 . 6.9 202.7 4.4 31.6 9.1 18.0 36.4 3.3 3.9 35.0
2023 Q1 284.4 . 7.6 . 7.6 253.6 5.3 43.4 8.1 21.9 46.5 3.4 3.7 54.0
Q2 279.6 . 7.6 . 7.6 248.9 5.4 42.3 7.7 22.6 46.8 3.8 3.6 50.4
Q3 274.8 . 7.5 . 7.5 244.4 5.4 40.4 5.6 22.6 47.2 3.8 3.8 51.3
Q4 264.0 . 7.4 . 7.4 233.9 5.3 37.2 5.1 22.2 46.8 3.5 4.5 47.2
2024 Q1 272.6 . 7.6 . 7.6 243.4 5.6 39.7 6.2 23.1 48.0 4.0 4.6 48.2
Medium-term lending
2021 314.5 . 40.5 . 40.5 239.5 20.6 28.3 5.4 19.3 20.8 4.3 12.3 52.0
2023 Q1 354.8 . 42.8 . 42.8 283.5 23.7 32.5 9.2 22.4 24.8 4.1 21.0 59.3
Q2 360.0 . 42.8 . 42.8 289.3 24.1 34.0 8.0 22.8 26.9 4.1 19.1 61.3
Q3 359.5 . 42.8 . 42.8 289.2 24.5 34.7 5.8 23.0 26.9 4.1 18.2 62.5
Q4 361.0 . 41.9 . 41.9 291.2 24.3 34.0 6.0 23.1 28.2 4.2 18.6 61.3
2024 Q1 354.1 . 40.8 . 40.8 285.1 24.1 32.9 5.8 22.5 27.3 4.1 15.6 61.6
Long-term lending
2021 2,601.2 1,591.4 1,630.9 1,373.0 257.8 1,259.3 452.2 86.2 113.8 60.8 83.2 48.3 39.4 99.3
2023 Q1 2,746.7 1,687.3 1,728.6 1,457.3 271.3 1,335.3 483.9 86.9 120.8 66.6 86.1 48.6 38.4 109.5
Q2 2,757.5 1,701.4 1,737.2 1,471.4 265.9 1,341.2 488.2 86.3 122.1 67.1 85.5 48.5 39.2 109.7
Q3 2,767.3 1,735.7 1,746.8 1,505.7 241.2 1,344.7 492.4 85.0 123.3 67.7 85.3 48.5 39.2 109.1
Q4 2,770.7 1,740.5 1,752.5 1,512.0 240.5 1,347.7 496.1 83.4 125.1 68.0 85.2 48.3 38.5 109.7
2024 Q1 2,774.5 1,753.5 1,754.4 1,524.4 230.1 1,350.7 497.5 82.8 126.3 68.0 84.1 48.1 38.5 109.7
Lending, total                                                 Change during quarter *
2023 Q1 +20.4 +11.3 + 4.8 + 8.6 – 3.8 +19.9 + 3.5 + 2.8 + 0.4 + 2.1 + 2.1 – 0.2 – 2.1 +10.6
Q2 +12.4 +11.5 + 9.1 +11.5 – 2.4 + 8.2 + 5.3 – 0.1 – 0.4 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 0.2 – 0.9 – 0.2
Q3 + 4.7 +10.9 + 9.2 +11.2 – 2.0 – 1.4 + 4.2 – 2.5 – 2.9 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 – 0.6 + 1.3
Q4 – 4.9 + 5.6 + 4.8 + 7.0 – 2.2 – 4.6 + 3.4 – 5.5 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.7 – 0.5 + 0.7 – 4.9
2024 Q1 + 4.9 + 6.5 + 1.9 + 7.7 – 5.8 + 5.8 + 2.2 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 0.3 – 1.0 + 0.3 – 2.7 + 1.3
Short-term lending
2023 Q1 + 4.7 . + 0.2 . + 0.2 + 4.7 + 0.3 + 1.8 – 4.0 + 1.1 + 1.9 + 0.2 – 0.1 + 3.9
Q2 – 3.7 . – 0.0 . – 0.0 – 3.6 + 0.1 – 1.1 – 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.0 – 2.4
Q3 – 4.8 . – 0.1 . – 0.1 – 4.7 – 0.0 – 1.9 – 2.1 – 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.9
Q4 –10.6 . – 0.2 . – 0.2 –10.2 – 0.1 – 3.1 – 0.7 – 0.4 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.7 – 4.1
2024 Q1 + 7.4 . + 0.2 . + 0.2 + 8.4 + 0.2 + 2.4 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 1.0
Medium-term lending
2023 Q1 + 6.1 . – 0.5 . – 0.5 + 7.6 + 0.3 + 1.2 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 0.5 – 0.1 – 2.0 + 3.0
Q2 + 4.7 . – 0.0 . – 0.0 + 5.4 + 0.4 + 1.6 – 1.3 + 0.4 + 2.0 – 0.0 – 1.6 + 2.1
Q3 – 0.8 . – 0.2 . – 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.7 – 2.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.9 + 1.1
Q4 + 1.0 . – 0.8 . – 0.8 + 1.7 – 0.3 – 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 – 1.3
2024 Q1 – 6.5 . – 1.2 . – 1.2 – 5.7 – 0.4 – 1.1 – 0.2 – 0.6 – 0.8 – 0.0 – 2.9 + 0.4
Long-term lending
2023 Q1 + 9.6 +11.3 + 5.1 + 8.6 – 3.5 + 7.6 + 2.9 – 0.3 + 1.7 + 0.8 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 3.7
Q2 +11.3 +11.5 + 9.1 +11.5 – 2.4 + 6.4 + 4.8 – 0.6 + 1.3 + 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.1
Q3 +10.3 +10.9 + 9.5 +11.2 – 1.7 + 3.8 + 4.0 – 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.6 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.6
Q4 + 4.7 + 5.6 + 5.7 + 7.0 – 1.3 + 3.9 + 3.8 – 1.6 + 1.8 + 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.3 + 0.6
2024 Q1 + 4.0 + 6.5 + 2.9 + 7.7 – 4.7 + 3.1 + 2.4 – 0.6 + 1.0 + 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.2
* Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical breaks have been eliminatedfrom the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
visional; subsequent alterations, which appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
33•
IV. Banks
Lending to employees and other individualsLending to
non-profit institutions
Services sector (including the professions) Memo items: Other lending
of which: of which:
TotalHousing
enterprisesHolding
companiesOther
real
estate
activitiesLending
to self-
employed
persons  2Lending
to craft
enterprises TotalHousing
loans TotalInstalment
loans  3Debit
balances
on wage,
salary
and
pension
accounts Totalof which:
Housing
loans   Period
End of year or quarter *                                   Lending, total
890.8 308.6 63.8 207.9 483.8 48.3 1,429.3 1,196.6 232.7 184.1 6.9 16.7 4.4 2021
961.2 336.3 78.6 220.4 503.4 54.2 1,496.2 1,261.4 234.7 185.5 7.3 17.4 4.7 2023 Q1
967.7 340.4 78.1 220.8 504.3 55.0 1,500.1 1,265.2 234.9 186.0 7.3 17.5 4.7 Q2
970.0 344.0 76.3 222.5 505.0 54.6 1,505.9 1,270.1 235.7 186.9 7.3 17.5 4.7 Q3
973.0 346.8 75.8 223.7 504.8 54.3 1,505.7 1,271.3 234.4 185.6 7.1 17.2 4.7 Q4
978.2 348.4 78.2 222.6 505.4 55.0 1,505.1 1,271.0 234.1 186.1 7.0 17.0 4.6 2024 Q1
Short-term lending
65.5 14.5 13.0 10.0 19.7 3.8 28.6 2.5 26.1 1.4 6.9 0.5 0.0 2021
72.5 16.5 14.9 11.6 21.0 5.3 30.2 2.3 27.9 2.1 7.3 0.6 –2023 Q1
71.7 16.5 14.2 11.0 21.0 6.7 30.1 2.2 27.9 2.3 7.3 0.6 – Q2
69.7 16.2 13.2 11.6 20.6 6.5 29.9 2.1 27.8 2.2 7.3 0.6 – Q3
67.4 16.0 12.6 11.3 20.6 5.7 29.5 2.1 27.5 2.2 7.1 0.6 0.0 Q4
69.7 15.1 14.5 11.4 20.9 6.9 28.8 2.0 26.8 1.9 7.0 0.5 0.0 2024 Q1
Medium-term lending
97.0 23.1 15.2 27.1 30.0 3.3 74.4 19.8 54.6 50.6 . 0.6 0.1 2021
110.3 25.3 21.4 29.0 30.3 6.4 70.8 19.0 51.8 47.3 . 0.5 0.1 2023 Q1
113.1 25.9 22.0 29.5 30.9 6.2 70.1 18.6 51.5 46.9 . 0.6 0.1 Q2
113.9 26.5 20.8 30.9 31.1 6.2 69.7 18.2 51.5 46.9 . 0.6 0.1 Q3
115.9 26.0 21.4 32.2 31.2 6.4 69.4 17.5 51.8 47.1 . 0.4 0.1 Q4
115.3 25.9 21.1 31.7 31.0 6.1 68.6 16.7 51.9 47.0 . 0.4 0.1 2024 Q1
Long-term lending
728.4 271.1 35.6 170.8 434.1 41.3 1,326.3 1,174.3 152.0 132.1 . 15.6 4.3 2021
778.4 294.6 42.4 179.7 452.1 42.5 1,395.1 1,240.1 155.1 136.1 . 16.3 4.6 2023 Q1
782.8 298.0 41.9 180.3 452.3 42.1 1,399.9 1,244.4 155.5 136.8 . 16.3 4.6 Q2
786.5 301.3 42.3 180.0 453.3 41.9 1,406.3 1,249.8 156.4 137.8 . 16.4 4.6 Q3
789.7 304.8 41.8 180.1 453.0 42.3 1,406.8 1,251.7 155.1 136.3 . 16.2 4.6 Q4
793.2 307.3 42.6 179.5 453.5 41.9 1,407.7 1,252.3 155.4 137.2 . 16.0 4.6 2024 Q1
Change during quarter *                                    Lending, total
+ 4.1 + 2.5 – 1.4 + 2.2 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 1.3 – 0.8 – 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 2023 Q1
+ 6.2 + 4.1 – 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 3.8 + 0.3 + 0.5 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 Q2
+ 2.1 + 3.5 – 1.8 + 1.7 + 0.5 – 0.4 + 6.0 + 5.0 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 Q3
+ 3.4 + 2.7 – 0.4 + 1.3 – 0.4 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 1.3 – 1.3 – 1.3 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 Q4
+ 5.0 + 1.3 + 2.4 – 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.4 + 0.8 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.1 2024 Q1
Short-term lending
– 0.1 + 0.4 – 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.3 – –2023 Q1
– 1.0 + 0.0 – 0.8 – 0.6 – 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.0 – Q2
– 2.3 – 0.3 – 1.0 + 0.5 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 – Q3
– 2.0 – 0.2 – 0.6 – 0.2 + 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.3 + 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.0 Q4
+ 2.3 – 0.9 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.2 – 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.8 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 –2024 Q1
Medium-term lending
+ 2.1 – 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.7 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 1.6 – 0.8 – 0.7 – 0.7 . – 0.0 –2023 Q1
+ 2.3 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.7 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.4 . + 0.0 – 0.0 Q2
+ 0.5 + 0.6 – 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.4 – 0.4 + 0.1 – 0.1 . + 0.1 – 0.0 Q3
+ 2.0 – 0.5 + 0.6 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.0 – 0.2 . – 0.2 + 0.0 Q4
– 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.8 – 0.8 + 0.1 – 0.1 . – – 0.0 2024 Q1
Long-term lending
+ 2.1 + 2.2 – 2.0 + 0.8 + 0.9 – 0.1 + 1.9 + 2.1 – 0.2 – 0.1 . + 0.1 + 0.1 2023 Q1
+ 4.9 + 3.4 – 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.6 – 0.1 + 4.8 + 4.3 + 0.5 + 0.7 . + 0.1 + 0.0 Q2
+ 3.9 + 3.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.9 – 0.2 + 6.4 + 5.5 + 0.9 + 1.0 . + 0.0 + 0.0 Q3
+ 3.3 + 3.5 – 0.3 + 0.2 – 0.5 – 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.9 – 1.0 – 1.2 . – 0.1 – 0.0 Q4
+ 3.2 + 2.3 + 0.8 – 0.6 + 0.4 – 0.3 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 1.0 . – 0.2 – 0.1 2024 Q1
are not specially marked.  1 Excluding fiduciary loans.  2 Including sole proprietors. 3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
34•
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year  2
PeriodDeposits,
totalSight
deposits Totalfor up
to and
including
1 year Totalfor up
to and
including
2 yearsfor more
than
2 yearsSavings
deposits  3Bank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)Liabilities
arising
from repos
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
2021 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 161.0 574.9 49.7 525.2 561.2 24.5 34.2 17.1 1.3
2022 4,162.0 2,720.6 873.5 314.8 558.7 50.5 508.2 533.2 34.6 35.9 18.5 3.9
2023 4,229.0 2,540.8 1,100.1 514.7 585.4 80.5 504.9 445.9 142.2 50.1 20.3 2.9
2023 May 4,172.9 2,623.9 993.0 419.3 573.6 61.7 511.9 490.6 65.4 36.6 20.4 4.1
June 4,176.3 2,600.9 1,020.0 445.4 574.6 64.4 510.2 483.3 72.1 36.5 20.3 2.8
July 4,180.2 2,582.2 1,042.9 468.5 574.4 65.8 508.6 475.9 79.1 36.7 19.9 3.5
Aug. 4,188.4 2,568.4 1,061.7 490.2 571.6 67.3 504.3 467.5 90.7 36.9 19.9 4.7
Sep. 4,189.3 2,558.0 1,072.5 497.7 574.8 71.5 503.3 461.8 97.0 37.1 19.9 6.5
Oct. 4,198.0 2,544.5 1,086.5 510.9 575.6 74.6 501.0 455.4 111.6 37.3 19.9 6.3
Nov. 4,217.3 2,552.9 1,085.6 506.9 578.6 76.7 501.9 448.3 130.5 37.6 20.8 6.4
Dec. 4,229.0 2,540.8 1,100.1 514.7 585.4 80.5 504.9 445.9 142.2 50.1 20.3 2.9
2024 Jan. 4,216.3 2,496.8 1,128.7 540.7 588.0 84.3 503.8 439.4 151.4 54.5 20.4 4.9
Feb. 4,213.6 2,478.3 1,143.5 555.4 588.1 85.1 503.0 434.4 157.3 57.5 20.4 5.0
Mar. 4,239.0 2,479.2 1,168.8 578.6 590.2 87.3 502.9 430.3 160.7 60.2 20.3 4.5
Apr. 4,239.6 2,475.4 1,173.6 584.9 588.8 84.7 504.0 425.8 164.8 63.7 20.3 4.4
Changes *
2022 +191.8 + 65.8 +143.4 +152.5 – 9.1 + 0.6 – 9.7 –27.5 +10.1 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 2.6
2023 + 76.6 –172.0 +226.4 +198.4 +28.0 +29.9 – 1.9 –82.3 +104.5 + 3.5 + 1.8 – 1.0
2023 May + 5.6 – 7.9 + 14.5 + 10.5 + 3.9 + 2.3 + 1.6 – 8.0 + 7.1 + 0.1 + 1.6 + 1.1
June + 2.3 – 23.0 + 26.0 + 25.4 + 0.7 + 2.4 – 1.7 – 7.3 + 6.7 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 1.3
July + 3.8 – 18.7 + 22.8 + 23.1 – 0.3 + 1.4 – 1.7 – 7.3 + 7.0 + 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.7
Aug. + 8.2 – 13.2 + 21.3 + 21.3 + 0.0 + 1.9 – 1.8 – 8.5 + 8.5 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.2
Sep. + 0.9 – 10.5 + 10.7 + 8.0 + 2.7 + 3.9 – 1.2 – 5.7 + 6.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.8
Oct. + 8.7 – 13.4 + 14.0 + 13.2 + 0.8 + 3.1 – 2.3 – 6.4 +14.6 + 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.2
Nov. + 19.3 + 8.5 – 1.0 – 4.1 + 3.1 + 2.1 + 0.9 – 7.1 +18.8 + 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.2
Dec. + 22.3 – 0.7 + 13.7 + 7.7 + 6.0 + 4.0 + 2.0 – 2.5 +11.8 + 1.2 – 0.4 – 3.5
2024 Jan. – 12.7 – 44.1 + 28.7 + 26.1 + 2.6 + 3.8 – 1.1 – 6.5 + 9.2 + 4.4 + 0.0 + 2.0
Feb. – 2.8 – 18.4 + 14.8 + 14.7 + 0.1 + 0.8 – 0.8 – 5.0 + 5.9 + 3.0 – 0.0 + 0.1
Mar. + 25.5 + 0.9 + 25.3 + 23.2 + 2.1 + 2.2 – 0.2 – 4.1 + 3.4 + 2.6 – 0.1 – 0.5
Apr. + 0.6 – 3.8 + 4.8 + 6.3 – 1.4 – 2.6 + 1.2 – 4.6 + 4.2 + 3.5 + 0.1 – 0.1
Domestic government End of year or month *
2021 210.1 82.4 121.9 42.0 79.9 23.8 56.1 2.5 3.3 25.8 2.0 1.0
2022 279.8 82.5 191.6 106.8 84.9 23.1 61.7 2.0 3.7 27.3 1.9 2.4
2023 286.9 91.2 190.5 105.6 84.9 23.3 61.6 0.9 4.4 26.6 1.4 0.2
2023 May 300.1 92.2 202.7 115.0 87.7 24.3 63.4 1.3 3.9 26.8 1.9 1.7
June 308.1 95.9 207.0 119.2 87.7 24.2 63.5 1.2 4.0 26.6 1.8 0.5
July 298.3 85.7 207.5 121.1 86.4 23.0 63.4 1.1 4.0 26.7 1.8 0.8
Aug. 305.6 95.1 205.4 119.3 86.1 22.8 63.3 1.0 4.1 26.6 1.9 2.2
Sep. 304.9 94.2 205.6 119.5 86.2 23.9 62.2 0.9 4.2 26.4 1.8 3.8
Oct. 291.0 92.3 193.5 108.0 85.6 23.5 62.0 0.9 4.2 26.2 1.8 2.9
Nov. 285.2 92.5 187.5 103.7 83.8 22.1 61.7 0.9 4.4 26.0 1.8 2.2
Dec. 286.9 91.2 190.5 105.6 84.9 23.3 61.6 0.9 4.4 26.6 1.4 0.2
2024 Jan. 272.5 84.9 182.5 98.4 84.1 23.4 60.7 0.8 4.3 26.5 1.3 1.0
Feb. 276.6 87.8 183.7 101.4 82.4 21.0 61.3 0.8 4.3 26.7 1.3 1.2
Mar. 283.2 89.0 189.1 106.1 83.0 22.0 61.1 0.8 4.3 26.9 1.3 1.3
Apr. 266.2 81.6 179.4 99.9 79.5 18.7 60.8 0.8 4.4 26.9 1.3 0.3
Changes *
2022 + 69.1 + 0.2 + 69.2 + 64.7 + 4.5 – 0.9 + 5.4 – 0.6 + 0.3 + 1.5 – 0.1 + 1.4
2023 + 6.5 + 8.7 – 1.7 – 1.7 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 1.1 + 0.6 + 0.1 – 0.6 – 2.2
2023 May + 5.0 + 6.6 – 1.6 – 1.3 – 0.4 – 0.4 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.4
June + 8.0 + 3.8 + 4.2 + 4.2 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 1.3
July – 9.8 – 10.2 + 0.5 + 1.8 – 1.3 – 1.2 – 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 – + 0.4
Aug. + 7.3 + 9.3 – 2.1 – 1.8 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 1.4
Sep. – 0.7 – 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 1.2 – 1.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 1.6
Oct. – 14.0 – 1.9 – 12.2 – 11.5 – 0.6 – 0.4 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.9
Nov. – 5.8 + 0.2 – 6.2 – 4.4 – 1.8 – 1.4 – 0.4 – 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.7
Dec. + 1.7 – 1.3 + 2.9 + 1.9 + 1.1 + 1.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.7 – 0.4 – 2.0
2024 Jan. – 14.4 – 6.3 – 8.0 – 7.2 – 0.8 + 0.1 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.8
Feb. + 4.1 + 2.9 + 1.2 + 3.0 – 1.8 – 2.4 + 0.6 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.3
Mar. + 6.6 + 1.2 + 5.4 + 4.7 + 0.7 + 0.9 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.1
Apr. – 17.0 – 7.3 – 9.7 – 6.2 – 3.5 – 3.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 1.0
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt securities.
2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  3 Excluding
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
35•
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont´d)
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year  2
PeriodDeposits,
totalSight
deposits Totalfor up
to and
including
1 year Totalfor up
to and
including
2 yearsfor more
than
2 yearsSavings
deposits  3Bank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)Liabilities
arising
from repos
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month *
2021 3,766.2 2,572.2 614.1 119.0 495.0 25.9 469.2 558.7 21.2 8.4 15.1 0.3
2022 3,882.2 2,638.1 681.9 208.0 473.9 27.4 446.5 531.2 31.0 8.6 16.6 1.5
2023 3,942.1 2,449.6 909.6 409.1 500.5 57.2 443.3 445.0 137.9 23.5 19.0 2.7
2023 May 3,872.8 2,531.8 790.2 304.3 485.9 37.4 448.5 489.2 61.5 9.8 18.5 2.4
June 3,868.2 2,505.0 813.1 326.1 486.9 40.2 446.7 482.0 68.1 9.9 18.5 2.3
July 3,881.9 2,496.5 835.4 347.4 488.0 42.8 445.2 474.9 75.1 10.0 18.0 2.7
Aug. 3,882.8 2,473.4 856.4 370.9 485.5 44.5 441.0 466.5 86.6 10.3 18.0 2.4
Sep. 3,884.4 2,463.8 866.9 378.3 488.6 47.5 441.1 460.9 92.9 10.7 18.1 2.7
Oct. 3,907.1 2,452.2 892.9 402.9 490.0 51.0 439.0 454.5 107.4 11.2 18.1 3.4
Nov. 3,932.1 2,460.5 898.0 403.2 494.8 54.5 440.3 447.5 126.1 11.6 19.0 4.2
Dec. 3,942.1 2,449.6 909.6 409.1 500.5 57.2 443.3 445.0 137.9 23.5 19.0 2.7
2024 Jan. 3,943.8 2,411.9 946.2 442.3 503.9 60.8 443.1 438.6 147.1 28.0 19.1 4.0
Feb. 3,937.0 2,390.6 959.8 454.0 505.8 64.1 441.7 433.6 153.0 30.9 19.0 3.8
Mar. 3,955.8 2,390.3 979.6 472.5 507.2 65.4 441.8 429.6 156.4 33.2 19.0 3.1
Apr. 3,973.5 2,393.8 994.2 485.0 509.2 66.0 443.2 425.0 160.5 36.8 19.0 4.1
Changes *
2022 +122.7 + 65.6 + 74.2 + 87.8 –13.6 + 1.4 –15.1 –27.0 + 9.8 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.3
2023 + 70.0 –180.7 +228.1 +200.1 +28.1 +29.8 – 1.7 –81.2 +103.8 + 3.5 + 2.4 + 1.2
2023 May + 0.6 – 14.6 + 16.1 + 11.8 + 4.3 + 2.7 + 1.6 – 7.9 + 7.1 + 0.0 + 1.6 + 0.7
June – 5.6 – 26.8 + 21.8 + 21.1 + 0.7 + 2.4 – 1.8 – 7.2 + 6.6 + 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1
July + 13.7 – 8.5 + 22.3 + 21.3 + 1.0 + 2.6 – 1.6 – 7.2 + 7.0 + 0.1 – 0.5 + 0.3
Aug. + 0.9 – 22.5 + 23.4 + 23.1 + 0.4 + 2.1 – 1.8 – 8.4 + 8.4 + 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.3
Sep. + 1.6 – 9.6 + 10.5 + 7.9 + 2.6 + 2.7 – 0.1 – 5.6 + 6.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2
Oct. + 22.7 – 11.6 + 26.1 + 24.7 + 1.5 + 3.5 – 2.0 – 6.4 +14.5 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.7
Nov. + 25.1 + 8.3 + 5.2 + 0.4 + 4.8 + 3.5 + 1.3 – 7.0 +18.7 + 0.5 + 0.9 + 0.9
Dec. + 20.7 + 0.6 + 10.8 + 5.9 + 4.9 + 2.8 + 2.1 – 2.4 +11.8 + 0.5 + 0.0 – 1.5
2024 Jan. + 1.7 – 37.8 + 36.7 + 33.3 + 3.4 + 3.7 – 0.2 – 6.5 + 9.2 + 4.5 + 0.1 + 1.2
Feb. – 6.8 – 21.3 + 13.6 + 11.7 + 1.9 + 3.3 – 1.4 – 5.0 + 5.9 + 2.8 – 0.0 – 0.2
Mar. + 18.9 – 0.3 + 19.9 + 18.4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.1 – 4.1 + 3.4 + 2.4 – 0.1 – 0.6
Apr. + 17.6 + 3.5 + 14.6 + 12.5 + 2.0 + 0.6 + 1.4 – 4.6 + 4.1 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 1.0
of which: Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2021 1,142.7 765.1 364.3 87.4 276.9 15.8 261.1 5.3 8.0 2.3 12.2 0.3
2022 1,193.5 783.4 397.1 140.8 256.3 16.8 239.5 4.4 8.6 1.9 13.5 1.5
2023 1,194.6 723.0 453.9 204.3 249.6 19.0 230.6 3.3 14.4 2.5 15.5 2.7
2023 May 1,189.3 742.5 433.2 175.7 257.5 17.9 239.6 3.9 9.7 2.0 15.2 2.4
June 1,181.8 726.7 441.4 185.1 256.2 18.3 237.9 3.8 9.9 2.0 15.1 2.3
July 1,189.1 727.3 447.9 192.7 255.3 18.6 236.7 3.7 10.1 2.1 14.6 2.7
Aug. 1,189.2 719.9 452.0 202.1 249.9 18.0 231.9 3.7 13.6 2.2 14.6 2.4
Sep. 1,187.8 719.1 451.5 200.9 250.6 18.7 231.9 3.6 13.6 2.2 14.6 2.7
Oct. 1,209.6 727.6 464.5 215.8 248.7 19.2 229.5 3.5 14.0 2.3 14.6 3.4
Nov. 1,213.9 738.9 457.4 208.5 248.9 19.0 229.8 3.5 14.2 2.3 15.5 4.2
Dec. 1,194.6 723.0 453.9 204.3 249.6 19.0 230.6 3.3 14.4 2.5 15.5 2.7
2024 Jan. 1,203.8 714.6 471.4 223.4 248.0 19.1 228.9 3.3 14.5 2.5 15.4 4.0
Feb. 1,183.1 697.1 468.1 221.6 246.5 19.1 227.4 3.2 14.7 2.7 15.4 3.8
Mar. 1,191.0 697.0 476.0 229.7 246.3 19.3 227.0 3.2 14.7 2.8 15.2 3.1
Apr. 1,197.7 700.0 479.7 232.5 247.1 19.1 228.1 3.2 14.8 2.9 15.3 4.1
Changes *
2022 + 56.2 + 17.7 + 38.8 + 52.1 –13.3 + 1.0 –14.3 – 0.9 + 0.6 – 0.5 + 1.0 + 1.3
2023 + 11.1 – 48.0 + 57.5 + 63.0 – 5.5 + 2.0 – 7.6 – 1.1 + 2.7 + 0.6 + 2.0 + 1.2
2023 May – 1.2 – 0.5 – 0.7 – 2.3 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 1.1 – 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.5 + 0.7
June – 8.5 – 15.9 + 7.3 + 8.9 – 1.6 + 0.1 – 1.7 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1
July + 7.2 + 0.6 + 6.5 + 7.5 – 1.1 + 0.3 – 1.4 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.5 + 0.3
Aug. + 0.1 – 6.8 + 6.6 + 9.1 – 2.5 – 0.3 – 2.2 – 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.3
Sep. – 1.3 – 0.7 – 0.5 – 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.5 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2
Oct. + 21.8 + 8.5 + 13.0 + 14.9 – 1.9 + 0.5 – 2.4 – 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.7
Nov. + 4.4 + 11.2 – 7.0 – 7.2 + 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.4 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.9
Dec. – 8.7 – 4.4 – 4.3 – 4.2 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 1.5
2024 Jan. + 9.2 – 8.5 + 17.5 + 19.1 – 1.6 + 0.1 – 1.7 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 1.2
Feb. – 20.7 – 17.5 – 3.3 – 1.8 – 1.5 – 0.0 – 1.5 – 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.2
Mar. + 7.8 – 0.1 + 7.9 + 8.1 – 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.6
Apr. + 6.7 + 3.0 + 3.6 + 2.8 + 0.8 – 0.2 + 1.0 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0
4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
36•
IV. Banks
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2
by creditor group by creditor group
Domestic households Domestic households
PeriodDeposits of
domestic
households
and
non-profit
institutions,
total Total TotalSelf-
employed
persons EmployeesOther
individualsDomestic
non-profit
institu-
tions Total TotalSelf-
employed
persons EmployeesOther
individuals
End of year or month *
2021 2,623.6 1,807.1 1,762.4 308.6 1,288.4 165.4 44.7 249.8 237.8 18.2 185.6 33.9
2022 2,688.7 1,854.7 1,809.9 307.3 1,342.5 160.1 44.8 284.8 268.7 31.2 200.5 37.1
2023 2,747.5 1,726.6 1,685.2 270.9 1,271.0 143.4 41.3 455.7 434.0 67.6 317.3 49.2
2023 Nov. 2,718.2 1,721.6 1,681.1 273.3 1,264.5 143.3 40.5 440.6 420.1 64.9 307.4 47.8
Dec. 2,747.5 1,726.6 1,685.2 270.9 1,271.0 143.4 41.3 455.7 434.0 67.6 317.3 49.2
2024 Jan. 2,740.1 1,697.3 1,656.3 268.0 1,248.0 140.4 41.0 474.8 453.1 71.2 331.3 50.7
Feb. 2,753.9 1,693.5 1,652.1 265.9 1,247.2 139.0 41.4 491.7 469.9 74.0 344.0 52.0
Mar. 2,764.9 1,693.3 1,652.0 261.1 1,252.7 138.1 41.3 503.6 481.4 75.5 352.8 53.2
Apr. 2,775.8 1,693.8 1,652.7 265.5 1,251.1 136.1 41.1 514.5 492.2 76.6 361.5 54.1
Changes *
2022 + 66.5 +48.0 +47.8 – 1.5 +54.1 – 4.7 + 0.1 +35.4 +31.4 +12.9 +17.2 +1.2
2023 + 58.9 –132.7 –129.2 –36.7 –76.8 –15.7 – 3.5 +170.6 +164.9 +36.1 +116.5 +12.2
2023 Nov. + 20.7 – 2.9 – 2.8 – 3.0 + 1.4 – 1.2 – 0.2 +12.1 +12.7 + 1.4 +10.4 +0.8
Dec. + 29.3 + 5.0 + 4.1 – 2.4 + 6.5 + 0.1 + 0.9 +15.0 +13.9 + 2.6 + 9.9 +1.3
2024 Jan. – 7.5 –29.3 –29.0 – 2.9 –23.1 – 3.0 – 0.3 +19.2 +19.1 + 3.6 +14.0 +1.5
Feb. + 13.8 – 3.8 – 4.2 – 2.0 – 0.7 – 1.4 + 0.4 +16.9 +16.8 + 2.8 +12.7 +1.3
Mar. + 11.0 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 4.8 + 5.5 – 0.8 – 0.1 +11.9 +11.5 + 1.5 + 8.8 +1.2
Apr. + 10.9 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 4.3 – 1.7 – 2.0 – 0.2 +10.9 +10.8 + 0.8 + 8.6 +1.4
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional.Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
marked.  1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group *
€ billion
Deposits
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
PeriodDomestic
government,
total TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans
End of year or month *
2021 210.1 43.5 4.2 3.2 36.0 0.1 11.7 47.4 21.7 13.8 11.3 0.6 14.1
2022 279.8 66.8 7.9 24.2 34.6 0.1 11.4 53.8 17.1 25.2 10.9 0.5 15.9
2023 286.9 52.0 9.8 6.7 35.5 0.0 11.6 51.9 19.7 21.9 9.9 0.4 15.1
2023 Nov. 285.2 55.1 12.7 7.4 34.9 0.0 11.3 51.2 18.7 21.6 10.4 0.4 14.7
Dec. 286.9 52.0 9.8 6.7 35.5 0.0 11.6 51.9 19.7 21.9 9.9 0.4 15.1
2024 Jan. 272.5 50.5 10.8 4.2 35.4 0.0 11.6 55.7 22.3 24.0 9.1 0.3 14.9
Feb. 276.6 49.5 10.1 4.0 35.3 0.0 11.7 57.9 21.1 26.7 9.7 0.4 14.9
Mar. 283.2 49.9 10.6 4.0 35.3 0.0 11.9 63.1 20.8 32.5 9.4 0.4 15.0
Apr. 266.2 49.2 10.4 3.5 35.2 0.0 11.9 54.2 18.1 27.4 8.3 0.4 15.0
Changes *
2022 +69.1 +23.0 +3.5 +20.9 –1.4 –0.0 –0.3 +6.4 –4.6 +11.3 –0.3 –0.1 +1.8
2023 + 6.5 –14.8 +1.9 –17.6 +0.9 –0.0 +0.2 –2.0 +2.9 –3.7 –1.0 –0.1 –0.1
2023 Nov. – 5.8 –4.6 –1.9 –2.5 –0.2 +0.0 +0.1 –11.5 –2.0 –9.3 –0.2 +0.0 –0.3
Dec. + 1.7 –3.1 –2.9 –0.8 +0.6 +0.0 +0.3 +0.8 +1.1 +0.3 –0.5 –0.0 +0.4
2024 Jan. –14.4 –1.5 +1.0 –2.5 –0.1 –0.0 +0.0 +3.8 +2.5 +2.0 –0.8 –0.0 –0.2
Feb. + 4.1 –1.0 –0.7 –0.2 –0.1 +0.0 +0.1 +2.2 –1.2 +2.8 +0.6 +0.0 +0.0
Mar. + 6.6 +0.5 +0.4 +0.0 –0.0 +0.0 +0.2 +5.2 –0.3 +5.7 –0.2 +0.0 +0.0
Apr. –17.0 –0.8 –0.2 –0.5 –0.1 –0.0 –0.0 –8.9 –2.7 –5.0 –1.2 +0.0 +0.0
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, East German Railways and Federal
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and DeutscheTelekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises ”.
Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date
are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
37•
IV. Banks
Savings deposits  3 Memo item:
by maturity
more than 1 year  2
of which:
Domestic
non-profit
institu-
tionsup to and
including
1 year Totalup to and
including
2 yearsmore than
2 years TotalDomestic
householdsDomestic
non-profit
institu-
tionsBank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)  5Liabilities
arising
from repos Period
End of year or month *
12.0 31.7 218.1 10.1 208.0 553.4 547.2 6.2 13.2 6.1 2.8 –2021
16.0 67.2 217.5 10.6 206.9 526.8 521.8 5.1 22.4 6.8 3.1 –2022
21.6 204.7 251.0 38.2 212.7 441.8 438.4 3.4 123.5 21.0 3.5 –2023
20.5 194.6 245.9 35.5 210.4 444.0 440.5 3.5 111.9 9.3 3.5 –2023 Nov.
21.6 204.7 251.0 38.2 212.7 441.8 438.4 3.4 123.5 21.0 3.5 – Dec.
21.7 218.9 255.9 41.7 214.2 435.3 432.0 3.3 132.6 25.5 3.6 –2024 Jan.
21.8 232.4 259.3 45.0 214.3 430.4 427.2 3.2 138.3 28.2 3.7 – Feb.
22.2 242.8 260.8 46.1 214.8 426.3 423.2 3.2 141.7 30.5 3.7 – Mar.
22.3 252.5 262.1 46.9 215.1 421.8 418.7 3.1 145.6 33.8 3.8 – Apr.
Changes *
+ 4.0 + 35.7 – 0.3 +0.5 – 0.8 –26.1 –25.0 –1.1 + 9.2 +0.7 + 0.3 –2022
+ 5.7 +137.0 +33.6 +27.8 + 5.8 –80.1 –78.4 –1.7 +101.1 +2.9 + 0.4 –2023
– 0.5 + 7.5 + 4.6 +3.7 + 0.9 – 7.0 – 6.8 –0.2 +18.5 +0.4 + 0.1 –2023 Nov.
+ 1.2 + 10.0 + 5.0 +2.8 + 2.3 – 2.3 – 2.2 –0.1 +11.6 +0.3 + 0.0 – Dec.
+ 0.0 + 14.2 + 5.0 +3.5 + 1.5 – 6.4 – 6.3 –0.1 + 9.1 +4.5 + 0.1 –2024 Jan.
+ 0.1 + 13.5 + 3.4 +3.3 + 0.1 – 4.9 – 4.9 –0.1 + 5.7 +2.7 + 0.1 – Feb.
+ 0.4 + 10.3 + 1.6 +1.1 + 0.5 – 4.1 – 4.0 –0.1 + 3.4 +2.3 + 0.0 – Mar.
+ 0.1 + 9.7 + 1.2 +0.9 + 0.3 – 4.5 – 4.5 –0.1 + 4.0 +3.3 + 0.1 – Apr.
registered debt securities.  2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Table IV.12).  3 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see alsofootnote 2).  4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
5 Included in time deposits.
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2,4Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
70.9 48.5 6.0 12.0 4.4 0.0 48.3 8.0 19.0 20.5 0.8 –2021
80.0 49.2 12.5 13.8 4.4 0.0 79.2 8.3 44.9 25.5 0.6 –2022
83.3 45.6 19.8 14.1 3.8 0.0 99.6 16.1 57.2 25.3 1.0 –2023
79.5 42.1 19.5 14.1 3.8 0.0 99.5 18.9 55.2 24.4 1.0 –2023 Nov.
83.3 45.6 19.8 14.1 3.8 0.0 99.6 16.1 57.2 25.3 1.0 – Dec.
73.1 35.5 19.8 14.0 3.7 0.0 93.2 16.2 50.4 25.5 1.0 –2024 Jan.
77.5 39.4 20.1 14.2 3.7 0.0 91.8 17.1 50.5 23.2 1.0 – Feb.
73.1 35.4 20.0 14.1 3.7 0.0 97.1 22.2 49.6 24.2 1.0 – Mar.
71.6 34.9 19.1 13.9 3.7 0.0 91.2 18.2 49.8 22.1 1.0 – Apr.
Changes *
+10.2 +0.9 + 7.9 +1.3 + 0.1 – +29.6 +0.3 +24.5 +4.9 – 0.2 –2022
+3.2 –3.8 + 7.3 +0.3 – 0.6 – +20.2 +7.8 +12.4 –0.3 + 0.3 –2023
+6.7 +6.3 + 0.3 +0.1 + 0.0 – + 3.6 –2.2 + 7.1 –1.4 + 0.1 –2023 Nov.
+3.8 +3.3 + 0.3 +0.1 + 0.0 – + 0.1 –2.8 + 2.0 +0.9 + 0.0 – Dec.
–10.2 –10.1 + 0.0 –0.1 – 0.1 – – 6.5 +0.2 – 6.8 +0.2 – 0.0 –2024 Jan.
+4.3 +3.9 + 0.3 +0.2 – 0.0 – – 1.4 +0.9 + 0.1 –2.4 + 0.0 – Feb.
–4.4 –4.0 – 0.1 –0.2 – 0.0 – + 5.3 +5.1 – 0.9 +1.1 – 0.0 – Mar.
–1.5 –0.4 – 0.9 –0.1 + 0.0 – – 5.8 –4.0 + 0.2 –2.1 + 0.0 – Apr.
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Federal Railways Fund,
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund,
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund.  2 Including liabilities arising fromnon-negotiable bearer debt securities.  3 Including deposits under savings and loan
contracts.  4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
38•
IV. Banks
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at 3 months'
noticeat more than 3
months' notice
Period Total Total Totalof which:
Special
savings
facilities  2 Totalof which:
Special
savings
facilities  2 Totalof which:
At 3
months'
noticeMemo
item:
Interest
credited
on
savings
depositsnon-banks,
total Totalof which:
With
maturities
of more
than
2 yearsforeign
non-banks
End of year or month *
2021 567.1 561.2 537.1 269.0 24.1 14.8 5.9 5.4 1.5 24.7 24.5 19.5 0.2
2022 538.5 533.2 510.3 254.2 22.9 14.2 5.3 4.8 1.4 34.9 34.6 20.8 0.2
2023 450.5 445.9 395.3 187.1 50.6 43.0 4.6 3.8 2.6 143.2 142.2 35.5 1.0
2023 Dec. 450.5 445.9 395.3 187.1 50.6 43.0 4.6 3.8 1.5 143.2 142.2 35.5 1.0
2024 Jan. 444.0 439.4 386.3 184.1 53.1 45.8 4.5 3.7 0.1 152.5 151.4 36.8 1.0
Feb. 439.0 434.4 379.0 180.9 55.5 48.3 4.5 3.7 0.1 158.4 157.3 37.9 1.1
Mar. 434.9 430.3 373.2 178.5 57.1 50.0 4.5 3.6 0.1 161.8 160.7 38.8 1.1
Apr. 430.2 425.8 367.7 176.3 58.0 51.0 4.5 3.6 0.1 166.0 164.8 39.3 1.1
Changes *
2022 –28.1 –27.5 –26.4 –14.6 –1.2 –0.6 –0.6 –0.6 . +10.2 +10.1 +1.3 +0.1
2023 –83.0 –82.3 –110.0 –52.3 +27.7 +28.8 –0.7 –1.1 . +105.2 +104.5 +12.2 +0.7
2023 Dec. –2.5 –2.5 –5.0 –1.7 +2.5 +2.5 –0.0 –0.1 . +11.9 +11.8 +1.8 +0.1
2024 Jan. –6.6 –6.5 –9.1 –3.1 +2.5 +2.8 –0.0 –0.1 . +9.3 +9.2 +1.2 +0.1
Feb. –5.0 –5.0 –7.3 –3.0 +2.4 +2.4 –0.0 –0.0 . +5.9 +5.9 +1.1 +0.0
Mar. –4.1 –4.1 –5.7 –2.4 +1.7 +1.7 –0.0 –0.1 . +3.4 +3.4 +0.9 –0.0
Apr. –4.6 –4.6 –5.5 –2.1 +0.9 +1.0 –0.0 –0.0 . +4.2 +4.2 +0.5 +0.0
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified as timedeposits.  2 Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or
basic rate of interest.  3 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
securities.
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper
of which:
with maturities ofNon-negotiable
bearer debt
securities and
money market
paper  6 Subordinated
up to
and including 1 yearmore than 1 year up to
and including 2 years
Period TotalFloating
rate
bonds  1Zero
coupon
bonds  1,2Foreign
currency
bonds  3,4Certifi-
cates
of
deposit Totalof which:
without
a nominal
guarantee  5Totalof which:
without
a nominal
guarantee  5more
than
2 years Totalof which:
with
maturities
of more
than
2 yearsnegotiable
debt
securitiesnon-
negotiable
debt
securities
End of year or month *
2021 1,173.6 106.8 13.5 331.4 98.7 106.8 1.9 18.0 4.5 1,048.8 0.9 0.7 34.6 0.1
2022 1,231.5 92.8 15.0 307.8 88.6 98.6 1.4 26.6 3.4 1,106.4 0.8 0.7 37.8 0.1
2023 1,327.5 85.8 15.7 312.6 101.2 122.9 1.3 43.7 3.4 1,160.9 0.0 0.0 37.5 0.1
2023 Dec. 1,327.5 85.8 15.7 312.6 101.2 122.9 1.3 43.7 3.4 1,160.9 0.0 0.0 37.5 0.1
2024 Jan. 1,341.4 89.1 16.7 310.2 87.0 109.9 1.4 48.2 3.6 1,183.2 0.0 0.0 37.7 0.1
Feb. 1,348.7 90.2 17.1 306.7 83.6 104.7 1.5 48.7 3.7 1,195.3 0.0 0.0 37.7 0.1
Mar. 1,362.4 93.1 17.3 310.4 93.6 114.0 1.4 49.0 3.7 1,199.4 0.0 0.0 37.9 0.1
Apr. 1,355.4 95.1 16.7 304.7 75.2 93.0 1.4 53.0 3.8 1,209.4 0.0 0.0 38.1 0.1
Changes *
2022 +59.1 –12.7 +1.1 –23.6 –9.9 –8.3 – 0.5 +8.5 –1.1 +58.9 –0.1 +0.1 +3.5 –
2023 +97.0 –6.3 +1.4 +4.4 +11.4 +24.5 – 0.0 +17.7 +0.6 +54.8 +0.0 +0.1 –0.3 –
2023 Dec. + 5.2 –2.7 –0.4 +0.1 +11.5 +8.7 – 0.3 +0.8 –0.1 –4.3 –0.0 –0.0 +0.0 –
2024 Jan. +13.9 +3.3 +1.0 –2.4 –14.2 –13.0 + 0.2 +4.5 +0.2 +22.3 – – +0.2 –
Feb. + 7.3 +1.2 +0.4 –3.5 –3.3 –5.3 + 0.1 +0.4 +0.1 +12.1 +0.0 – –0.1 –
Mar. +13.7 +2.9 +0.2 +3.7 +10.0 +9.3 – 0.1 +0.4 –0.0 +4.1 –0.0 –0.0 +0.2 –
Apr. – 7.0 +2.0 –0.6 –5.7 –18.5 –21.0 + 0.0 +3.9 +0.1 +10.0 +0.0 +0.0 +0.3 –
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Including debt securities denominated in foreign currencies.  2 Issue value when
floated.  3 Including floating rate notes and zero coupon bonds denominated in foreigncurrencies.  4 Bonds denominated in non-euro area currencies.  5 Negotiable bearer debt
securities and money market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%.
6 Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see
also Table IV.10, footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
39•
IV. Banks
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany *
Interim statements
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks
(MFIs)  6Deposits of non-
banks (non-MFIs)
Building loans
End of
year/monthNum-
ber
of
associ-
ationsBalance
sheet
total  1Credit
bal-
ances
and
loans
(ex-
cluding
building
loans)  2Building
loans  3Bank
debt
secur-
ities  4Loans
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsInterim
and
bridging
loansOther
building
loansSecur-
ities (in-
cluding
Treasury
bills
and
Treasury
discount
paper)  5Deposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsSight
and time
depositsDeposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsSight and
time de-
posits  7Bearer
debt
secur-
ities
out-
stand-
ingCapital
(includ-
ing pub-
lished
re-
serves)  8Memo
item:
New
con-
tracts
entered
into in
year or
month  9
All building and loan associations
2023 15 259.5 25.6 0.1 15.9 15.7 135.0 41.3 21.8 1.2 36.8 183.2 10.7 6.6 13.0 98.2
2024 Feb. 14 259.1 25.5 0.2 15.7 16.5 134.6 41.4 21.4 1.1 36.5 182.4 11.3 7.0 12.9 6.5
Mar. 14 259.0 25.3 0.2 15.6 17.0 134.5 41.4 21.1 1.0 36.7 181.7 11.5 7.0 13.0 7.7
Apr. 14 258.1 24.2 0.2 15.6 17.5 134.2 41.5 21.1 1.0 36.3 180.9 11.5 7.5 13.1 7.5
Private building and Ioan associations
2024 Feb. 9 182.7 11.7 0.1 8.7 11.1 104.4 35.3 8.8 0.4 33.5 117.1 10.8 7.0 8.8 4.3
Mar. 9 182.8 11.7 0.2 8.6 11.4 104.3 35.3 8.8 0.3 33.8 116.6 11.1 7.0 8.9 4.2
Apr. 9 182.0 10.6 0.2 8.7 11.7 104.0 35.4 8.9 0.3 33.2 116.0 11.1 7.5 9.0 4.2
Public building and Ioan associations
2024 Feb. 5 76.4 13.7 0.0 7.0 5.4 30.2 6.1 12.6 0.7 3.0 65.3 0.5 – 4.1 2.2
Mar. 5 76.1 13.6 0.0 7.0 5.6 30.2 6.1 12.3 0.7 2.9 65.2 0.5 – 4.1 3.4
Apr. 5 76.1 13.5 0.0 6.9 5.8 30.2 6.1 12.2 0.7 3.1 65.0 0.4 – 4.1 3.3
Trends in building and loan association business
€ billion
Capital promised Capital disbursed Changes in deposits
under savings and
loan contracts AllocationsDisbursement
commitments
outstanding at
end of periodInterest and
repayments
received on
building loans  11
Deposits under
savings and
loan contractsLoans under
savings and
loan contracts  10
PeriodAmounts
paid into
savings
and
loan ac-
counts  10Interest
credited
on
deposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsRepay-
ments
of
deposits
under
cancelled
savings
and
loan
con-
tracts Totalof
which:
Net
alloca-
tions  12 Total Totalof which:
Applied
to settle-
ment of
interim
and
bridging
loans Totalof which:
Applied
to settle-
ment of
interim
and
bridging
loansNewly
granted
interim
and
bridging
loans
and
other
building
loans Totalof
which:
Under
alloc-
ated
con-
tracts Totalof
which:
Repay-
ments
during
quarterMemo
item:
Housing
bonuses
re-
ceived  13
All building and loan associations
2023 27.0 1.9 6.4 52.0 40.3 49.9 25.9 4.2 8.7 4.4 15.3 12.6 7.3 4.9 4.1 0.2
2024 Feb. 2.2 0.1 0.5 4.7 3.7 4.1 2.3 0.4 0.8 0.4 1.1 12.4 7.4 0.4 0.0
Mar. 2.1 0.1 0.5 4.9 3.8 4.4 2.5 0.3 0.8 0.4 1.1 12.4 7.4 0.4 1.1 0.0
Apr. 2.1 0.1 0.5 4.9 3.8 4.6 2.5 0.4 0.9 0.4 1.2 12.2 7.3 0.5 . 0.0
Private building and Ioan associations
2024 Feb. 1.4 0.0 0.2 3.2 2.4 2.9 1.6 0.3 0.5 0.3 0.8 8.2 4.1 0.3 0.0
Mar. 1.4 0.1 0.3 3.3 2.5 3.2 1.8 0.3 0.5 0.3 0.9 8.1 4.0 0.3 0.8 0.0
Apr. 1.4 0.1 0.3 3.5 2.6 3.3 1.7 0.4 0.6 0.3 0.9 8.0 4.0 0.3 . 0.0
Public building and Ioan associations
2024 Feb. 0.8 0.0 0.2 1.5 1.3 1.2 0.7 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.2 4.2 3.3 0.1 0.0
Mar. 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.5 1.3 1.2 0.7 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.2 4.3 3.4 0.1 0.3 0.0
Apr. 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.5 1.2 1.3 0.7 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.3 3.3 0.1 . 0.0
* Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures for
the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which
appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 See Table IV.2,
footnote 1.  2 Including claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from
registered debt securities and central bank credit balances.  3 Loans under savings and
loan contracts and interim and bridging loans.  4 Including money market paper and
small amounts of other securities issued by banks.  5 Including equalisation claims.
6 Including liabilities to building and loan associations.  7 Including small amounts of
savings deposits.  8 Including participation rights capital and fund for general bankingrisks. 9 Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as
new contracts.  10 For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
arising from the allocation of contracts see "Capital disbursed".  11 Including housing
bonuses credited.  12 Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans.  13 The amounts already
credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in "Amounts paid into
savings and loan accounts" and "Interest and repayments received on building loans".

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
40•
IV. Banks
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other assets  7
Credit balances and loans Loans
PeriodGerman
banks
(MFIs)
with
foreign
branches
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diaries 
 
foreign
branches  1
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diariesBalance
sheet
total  7 Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2,3 Total Totalto
German
non-
banksto
foreign
non-
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2 Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio
Foreign branches                                               End of year or month *
2021 51 207 1,504.5 471.2 457.8 297.9 159.9 13.4 497.2 418.8 12.9 405.9 78.4 536.1 404.5
2022 47 202 1,625.5 461.8 447.4 315.6 131.8 14.4 516.7 447.7 9.7 437.9 69.0 647.0 513.3
2023 47 200 1,544.2 457.5 437.7 304.4 133.3 19.8 507.9 421.0 5.4 415.6 86.9 578.8 417.0
2023 June 47 200 1,623.2 466.6 447.7 298.0 149.7 18.9 496.6 426.5 6.1 420.4 70.1 660.1 492.7
July 48 202 1,649.4 491.3 471.2 319.0 152.2 20.1 496.6 423.3 5.9 417.4 73.3 661.6 491.4
Aug. 48 202 1,663.5 483.7 463.8 312.6 151.2 19.9 499.1 424.2 6.1 418.1 74.9 680.8 502.7
Sep. 48 201 1,680.8 488.5 468.9 315.9 153.1 19.6 496.6 420.9 6.4 414.5 75.7 695.7 513.6
Oct. 48 201 1,693.0 477.0 457.2 306.9 150.3 19.8 499.7 420.5 6.0 414.5 79.2 716.3 529.9
Nov. 47 200 1,622.2 468.5 448.3 304.7 143.6 20.2 507.9 422.9 5.7 417.2 85.0 645.8 462.2
Dec. 47 200 1,544.2 457.5 437.7 304.4 133.3 19.8 507.9 421.0 5.4 415.6 86.9 578.8 417.0
2024 Jan. 47 200 1,580.2 471.1 450.1 310.0 140.1 21.0 518.6 425.0 5.1 419.9 93.6 590.5 402.9
Feb. 47 200 1,620.1 486.0 464.7 322.5 142.2 21.3 517.5 424.8 5.0 419.9 92.7 616.7 425.7
Mar. 47 199 1,634.7 506.6 483.8 327.2 156.6 22.8 523.9 431.4 5.1 426.3 92.6 604.1 428.8
Changes *
2022 –4 –5 +124.1 –13.3 –14.3 +17.8 –32.1 +1.0 +6.7 +17.5 –3.2 +20.6 –10.8 +108.1 +103.0
2023 ±0 –2 –83.7 –2.7 –8.1 –12.1 +4.0 +5.4 –1.4 –20.2 –4.4 –15.8 +18.8 – 68.1 –94.4
2023 July +1 +2 +22.9 +24.1 +22.8 +19.5 +3.3 +1.2 +1.3 –2.2 –0.2 –2.0 +3.5 + 1.7 – 0.7
Aug. ±0 – +13.4 –8.7 –8.5 –6.4 –2.1 –0.2 –0.7 –1.9 +0.2 –2.1 +1.2 + 18.5 +10.7
Sep. ±0 –1 +16.1 +2.8 +3.1 +3.3 –0.1 –0.3 –8.4 –8.7 +0.4 –9.0 +0.3 + 13.7 + 9.7
Oct. ±0 – +12.3 –11.0 –11.2 –8.9 –2.3 +0.2 +4.4 +0.7 –0.4 +1.2 +3.6 + 20.8 +16.6
Nov. –1 –1 –69.3 –6.3 –6.8 –2.2 –4.5 +0.5 +14.6 +8.2 –0.3 +8.5 +6.4 – 69.0 –66.3
Dec. ±0 – –77.5 –10.0 –9.6 +0.3 –9.9 –0.4 +2.6 +0.5 –0.3 +0.8 +2.1 – 67.5 –44.7
2024 Jan. ±0 – +35.3 +12.4 +11.3 +5.6 +5.6 +1.1 +5.7 –0.4 –0.3 –0.1 +6.1 + 11.1 –15.1
Feb. ±0 – +39.9 +15.1 +14.8 +12.5 +2.3 +0.3 –1.0 –0.0 –0.1 +0.1 –0.9 + 26.2 +22.8
Mar. ±0 –1 +14.4 +20.6 +19.1 +4.7 +14.4 +1.5 +6.2 +6.3 +0.2 +6.2 –0.1 – 12.6 + 3.0
Foreign subsidiaries 8                                           End of year or month *
2021 12 35 246.0 50.8 44.4 20.7 23.7 6.3 139.5 116.3 12.6 103.7 23.2 55.7 0.0
2022 11 32 256.7 61.5 52.0 20.5 31.4 9.5 145.8 124.5 13.3 111.2 21.3 49.4 0.0
2023 12 31 264.0 74.5 63.9 25.7 38.2 10.6 146.4 125.2 11.9 113.4 21.1 43.1 0.0
2023 Mar. 11 32 253.9 62.2 51.7 20.7 31.0 10.5 146.5 126.2 13.3 112.9 20.2 45.2 0.0
Apr. 11 31 250.9 64.4 53.3 22.4 30.9 11.1 145.3 125.6 13.0 112.6 19.8 41.2 0.0
May 11 31 250.9 59.3 48.8 21.5 27.2 10.5 146.2 126.3 12.8 113.5 19.9 45.5 0.0
June 12 32 253.3 64.2 52.8 22.4 30.4 11.5 146.6 126.7 12.7 113.9 19.9 42.5 0.0
July 12 31 253.4 63.6 52.2 23.0 29.3 11.4 147.4 126.9 12.9 114.1 20.5 42.4 0.0
Aug. 12 31 252.8 62.8 52.2 21.9 30.3 10.6 146.0 125.6 12.7 112.9 20.4 44.1 0.0
Sep. 12 31 256.2 66.4 56.0 25.0 31.0 10.5 146.7 125.8 12.3 113.5 20.9 43.0 0.0
Oct. 12 31 257.4 65.8 56.0 24.5 31.5 9.8 146.8 126.2 12.0 114.2 20.6 44.8 0.0
Nov. 12 31 259.9 66.9 57.7 23.6 34.1 9.3 147.8 126.9 12.1 114.8 20.9 45.2 0.0
Dec. 12 31 264.0 74.5 63.9 25.7 38.2 10.6 146.4 125.2 11.9 113.4 21.1 43.1 0.0
Changes *
2022 –1 –3 +6.5 +8.2 +5.2 –0.2 +5.6 +2.8 +5.0 +6.9 +0.7 +6.3 –1.9 – 6.5 ± 0.0
2023 +1 –1 +8.7 +13.5 +12.2 +5.2 +7.1 +1.2 +1.5 +1.7 –1.4 +3.1 –0.2 – 6.3 ± 0.0
2023 Apr. – –1 –2.7 +2.2 +1.6 +1.7 –0.1 +0.6 –0.8 –0.4 –0.3 –0.1 –0.5 – 4.1 ± 0.0
May – – –1.5 –5.7 –4.9 –0.8 –4.1 –0.7 –0.1 –0.3 –0.2 –0.0 +0.1 + 4.3 ± 0.0
June +1 +1 +3.2 +5.3 +4.2 +0.9 +3.3 +1.0 +0.9 +0.9 –0.0 +0.9 +0.0 – 3.0 ± 0.0
July – –1 +0.6 –0.5 –0.4 +0.6 –1.0 –0.1 +1.2 +0.7 +0.1 +0.5 +0.6 – 0.1 ± 0.0
Aug. – – –1.2 –1.0 –0.2 –1.0 +0.8 –0.9 –1.8 –1.7 –0.2 –1.5 –0.1 + 1.7 ± 0.0
Sep. – – +2.2 +3.2 +3.5 +3.0 +0.5 –0.2 –0.0 –0.5 –0.4 –0.1 +0.5 – 1.0 ± 0.0
Oct. – – +1.4 –0.6 +0.1 –0.4 +0.5 –0.7 +0.2 +0.5 –0.3 +0.8 –0.3 + 1.8 ± 0.0
Nov. – – +3.8 +1.5 +2.0 –0.9 +2.9 –0.4 +1.8 +1.5 +0.1 +1.5 +0.3 + 0.4 ± 0.0
Dec. – – +4.5 +7.7 +6.3 +2.1 +4.2 +1.4 –1.1 –1.3 –0.2 –1.1 +0.3 – 2.0 ± 0.0
* In this table "foreign" also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from
the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are alwaysto be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following
Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Several branches in a given country of
domicile are regarded as a single branch.  2 Treasury bills, Treasury discount paper

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
41•
IV. Banks
Deposits Other liabilities  6,7
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4
Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banks Total Total 
Shortterm 
Medium
and
longtermForeign
non-banksMoney
market
paper
and debt
securities
outstand-
ing 5Working
capital
and own
funds Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio Period
End of year or month *                  Foreign branches
950.2 638.5 461.2 177.3 311.7 8.1 6.3 1.8 303.6 65.2 51.3 437.9 403.4 2021
943.4 573.6 435.2 138.5 369.8 10.4 8.9 1.5 359.4 61.7 63.1 557.4 512.9 2022
943.5 554.5 422.6 131.9 389.0 10.6 9.5 1.2 378.4 64.1 66.1 470.5 418.3 2023
946.8 571.3 412.7 158.6 375.5 7.8 6.6 1.2 367.7 68.6 65.2 542.6 493.9 2023 June
966.6 577.8 416.3 161.5 388.8 7.7 6.5 1.2 381.0 76.1 65.1 541.7 492.8 July
965.4 581.8 423.8 158.0 383.5 8.3 7.0 1.3 375.3 78.9 65.4 553.8 503.1 Aug.
963.9 571.6 418.7 152.9 392.3 11.0 9.6 1.4 381.3 84.4 66.0 566.5 513.9 Sep.
958.1 572.8 421.2 151.6 385.3 11.0 9.5 1.4 374.3 82.9 66.0 586.0 530.5 Oct.
958.5 561.4 414.6 146.8 397.0 11.5 10.3 1.2 385.5 81.2 65.9 516.6 463.3 Nov.
943.5 554.5 422.6 131.9 389.0 10.6 9.5 1.2 378.4 64.1 66.1 470.5 418.3 Dec.
967.4 573.0 433.0 140.0 394.4 11.0 9.8 1.2 383.4 88.2 69.1 455.4 404.8 2024 Jan.
984.5 586.5 443.4 143.1 398.0 10.7 9.7 1.0 387.3 88.5 69.2 477.9 427.6 Feb.
997.2 587.3 442.4 144.9 409.9 11.3 10.3 1.0 398.6 86.3 69.4 481.8 431.6 Mar.
Changes *
– 6.2 –64.2 –22.2 –42.0 + 58.0 + 2.3 + 2.6 – 0.3 +55.7 – 6.3 +11.8 +119.0 + 109.5 2022
+ 1.2 –17.0 –13.8 – 3.1 + 18.1 + 1.2 + 1.5 – 0.3 +16.9 + 3.9 + 3.0 – 88.0 – 94.5 2023
+17.8 +5.9 +1.7 +4.3 +11.9 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.0 +12.0 + 8.0 –0.1 – 1.4 – 1.1 2023 July
– 2.6 +2.9 +7.6 –4.8 – 5.4 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 – 5.8 + 2.2 +0.3 + 12.1 + 10.3 Aug.
– 4.2 –12.7 –5.1 –7.6 + 8.4 + 2.7 + 2.7 + 0.1 + 5.7 + 4.2 +0.6 + 12.8 + 10.8 Sep.
– 5.2 +1.7 +2.5 –0.8 – 6.9 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 6.9 – 1.3 +0.0 + 19.4 + 16.6 Oct.
+ 3.1 –8.9 –6.6 –2.3 +12.0 + 0.5 + 0.8 – 0.3 +11.5 – 0.2 –0.2 – 69.3 – 67.1 Nov.
–13.7 –5.9 +8.4 –14.3 – 7.9 – 0.9 – 0.9 + 0.0 – 7.0 –16.6 +0.2 – 46.7 – 45.0 Dec.
+22.3 +17.2 +10.4 +6.8 + 5.2 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 4.8 +23.5 +3.0 – 15.1 – 13.5 2024 Jan.
+17.2 +13.7 +10.5 +3.2 + 3.5 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 + 3.8 + 0.3 +0.1 + 22.5 + 22.8 Feb.
+12.7 +0.7 –1.0 +1.8 +11.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 – 0.1 +11.4 – 2.3 +0.1 + 4.0 + 4.0 Mar.
End of year or month * Foreign subsidiaries 8
178.6 64.2 33.0 31.2 114.4 7.3 4.9 2.4 107.1 16.4 20.3 30.7 0.0 2021
189.4 67.5 38.6 28.9 122.0 6.9 4.6 2.3 115.1 13.5 20.1 33.7 0.0 2022
195.9 76.0 51.2 24.8 119.9 6.4 4.0 2.4 113.4 12.1 20.8 35.3 0.0 2023
186.6 71.2 42.2 29.1 115.4 6.8 4.3 2.5 108.5 12.3 20.3 34.8 0.0 2023 Mar.
183.5 71.0 44.0 27.0 112.5 6.9 4.5 2.5 105.6 12.2 20.2 35.0 0.0 Apr.
183.9 71.2 43.6 27.6 112.8 6.9 4.4 2.5 105.9 12.1 20.6 34.3 0.0 May
185.6 71.9 45.4 26.5 113.7 6.6 4.2 2.4 107.1 10.6 20.5 36.6 0.0 June
187.9 72.3 47.0 25.3 115.6 6.8 4.4 2.4 108.8 10.5 20.5 34.4 0.0 July
185.5 70.6 46.0 24.7 114.8 6.6 4.2 2.4 108.2 10.3 20.6 36.4 0.0 Aug.
188.2 74.1 49.1 25.1 114.1 6.7 4.3 2.4 107.4 11.3 20.5 36.0 0.0 Sep.
189.3 73.1 48.3 24.8 116.2 6.5 4.1 2.4 109.7 11.6 20.8 35.8 0.0 Oct.
192.1 73.7 48.4 25.3 118.4 6.5 4.1 2.4 111.8 11.6 20.8 35.4 0.0 Nov.
195.9 76.0 51.2 24.8 119.9 6.4 4.0 2.4 113.4 12.1 20.8 35.3 0.0 Dec.
Changes *
+ 7.7 + 1.4 + 5.6 – 4.2 + 6.3 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.1 + 6.7 – 2.9 – 0.2 + 2.2 ± 0.0 2022
+ 7.6 + 8.9 +12.6 – 3.8 – 1.3 – 0.4 – 0.5 + 0.1 – 0.8 – 1.4 + 0.7 + 1.8 ± 0.0 2023
– 2.7 –0.1 +1.8 –1.9 – 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 2.7 – 0.1 –0.1 + 0.2 ± 0.0 2023 Apr.
– 0.6 –0.3 –0.4 +0.2 – 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.4 – 0.0 +0.4 – 1.2 ± 0.0 May
+ 2.3 +1.0 +1.8 –0.9 + 1.3 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 1.6 – 1.6 –0.1 + 2.5 ± 0.0 June
+ 2.7 +0.6 +1.6 –1.1 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 2.0 – 0.0 +0.0 – 2.1 ± 0.0 July
– 2.9 –1.9 –1.0 –0.8 – 1.1 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.9 – 0.2 +0.1 + 1.8 ± 0.0 Aug.
+ 1.9 +3.2 +3.1 +0.1 – 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 1.4 + 1.0 –0.1 – 0.7 ± 0.0 Sep.
+ 1.2 –1.0 –0.8 –0.2 + 2.2 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 2.3 + 0.2 +0.3 – 0.2 ± 0.0 Oct.
+ 3.7 +0.9 +0.1 +0.8 + 2.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 2.8 + 0.1 +0.0 – 0.0 ± 0.0 Nov.
+ 4.1 +2.4 +2.8 –0.4 + 1.7 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 1.8 + 0.4 +0.0 + 0.0 ± 0.0 Dec.
and other money market paper, debt securities.  3 Including own debt securities.
4 Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities.  5 Issues of
negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money market paper.  6 Includingsubordinated liabilities.  7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1.  8 The collection of data
regarding foreign subsidiaries matured in 12/2023.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
42•
V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2Required reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4 Current accounts  5Excess reserves
(without deposit
facility)  6 Deficiencies  7
2017 12,415.8 124.2 123.8 1,275.2 1,151.4 0.0
2018 12,775.2 127.8 127.4 1,332.1 1,204.8 0.0
2019 13,485.4 134.9 134.5 1,623.7 1,489.3 0.0
2020 14,590.4 145.9 145.5 3,029.4 2,883.9 0.0
2021 15,576.6 155.8 155.4 3,812.3 3,656.9 0.1
2022 16,843.0 168.4 168.0 195.6 28.1 0.0
2023 16,261.6 162.6 162.3 170.5 8.2 0.0
2024 Mar. 16,189.5 161.9 161.6 168.4 6.8 0.0
p Apr. 16,161.1 161.6 161.3 ... ... ...
May . . . . . .
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2German share of
euro area reserve base
as a percentageRequired reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4Current accounts  5Excess reserves
(without deposit
facility)  6 Deficiencies  7
2017 3,456,192 27.8 34,562 34,404 424,547 390,143 2
2018 3,563,306 27.9 35,633 35,479 453,686 418,206 1
2019 3,728,027 27.6 37,280 37,131 486,477 449,346 0
2020 4,020,792 27.6 40,208 40,062 878,013 837,951 1
2021 4,260,398 27.4 42,604 42,464 1,048,819 1,006,355 0
2022 4,664,630 27.7 46,646 46,512 54,848 8,337 5
2023 4,483,853 27.6 44,839 44,709 47,008 2,299 0
2024 Mar. 4,428,380 27.4 44,284 44,154 45,947 1,793 0
p Apr. 4,456,651 27.6 44,567 44,437 ... ... ...
May . . . . . . .
a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Big banksRegional banks
and other
commercial banksBranches of
foreign banksLandesbanken and
savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banksBanks with special,
development and
other central
support tasks
2017 6,366 5,678 3,110 11,163 6,256 132 1,699
2018 7,384 4,910 3,094 11,715 6,624 95 1,658
2019 7,684 5,494 2,765 12,273 7,028 109 1,778
2020 8,151 6,371 3,019 12,912 7,547 111 2,028
2021 9,113 6,713 2,943 13,682 8,028 109 1,876
2022 9,814 7,396 3,216 14,465 8,295 117 2,471
2023 9,282 7,417 3,170 14,061 8,178 148 2,118
2024 Mar. 9,236 7,133 3,091 13,984 8,207 144 2,171
Apr. 9,221 7,393 3,122 14,038 8,219 136 2,106
May . . . . . . .
b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Liabilities (excluding savings
deposits, deposits with build-
ing and loan associations
and repos) to non-MFIs with
agreed maturities of up to 2
yearsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed maturities
of up to 2 years to MFIs that are
resident in euro area countries but
not subject to minimum reserve
requirementsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed
maturities of up to 2 years to
banks in non-euro area countriesSavings deposits with agreed
periods of notice of up
to 2 yearsLiabilities arising from bearer debt
securities issued with agreed matu-
rities of up to 2 years and bearer
money market paper after deduction
of a standard amount for bearer debt
certificates or deduction of such
paper held by the reporting
institution
2017 2,338,161 628 415,084 581,416 120,894
2018 2,458,423 1,162 414,463 576,627 112,621
2019 2,627,478 1,272 410,338 577,760 111,183
2020 2,923,462 1,607 436,696 560,770 105,880
2021 3,079,722 9,030 508,139 561,608 101,907
2022 3,352,177 12,609 566,227 543,694 116,094
2023 3,447,513 968 420,839 455,493 125,531
2024 Mar. 3,460,846 815 374,487 438,972 134,372
Apr. 3,471,855 848 399,588 433,915 130,309
May . . . . .
1 The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main refinancing
operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for
which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled.  2 Article 5 of the
Regulation (EU) 2021/378 of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum
reserve requirements (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies,
pursuant to Article 6(1)(a)).  3 Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was 2%between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it has stood at
1%. 4 Article 6(2) of the Regulation (EU) 2021/378 of the European Central Bank on the
application of minimum reserve requirements.  5 Average credit balances of credit
institutions at national central banks.  6 Average credit balances less required reserves
after deduction of the lump-sum allowance.  7 Required reserves after deduction of the
lump-sum allowance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
43•
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest
% per annum
ECB interest rates Basic rates of interest
Main refinancing
operationsMain refinancing
operations
Applicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1Applicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1
2012 July 11 0.00 0.75 – 1.50 2022 July 27 0.00 0.50 – 0.75 2007 Jan. 1 2.70 2013 Jan. 1 – 0.13
Sep. 14 0.75 1.25 – 1.50 July 1 3.19 July 1 – 0.38
2013 May 8 0.00 0.50 – 1.00 Nov. 2 1.50 2.00 – 2.25
Nov. 13 0.00 0.25 – 0.75 Dec. 21 2.00 2.50 – 2.75 2008 Jan. 1 3.32 2014 Jan. 1 – 0.63
July 1 3.19 July 1 – 0.73
2014 June 11 – 0.10 0.15 – 2023 Feb. 8 2.50 3.00 – 3.25
Sep. 10 – 0.20 0.05 – 2.00 Mar. 22 3.00 3.50 – 3.75 2009 Jan. 1 1.62 2015 Jan. 1 – 0.83
2.25 May 10 3.25 3.75 – 4.00 July 1 0.12
2015 Dec. 9 – 0.30 0.05 – 2.00 June 21 3.50 4.00 – 4.25 2016 July 1 – 0.88
Aug. 2 3.75 4.25 – 4.50 2011 July 1 0.37
2016 Mar. 16 – 0.40 0.00 – 0.25 Sep. 20 4.00 4.50 – 4.75 2023 Jan. 1 1.62
2012 Jan. 1 0.12 July 1 3.12
2019 Sep. 18 – 0.50 0.00 – 0.25 2024 June 12 3.75 4.25 – 4.50
2024 Jan. 1 3.62
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid
amountAllotment
amount Fixed rateMinimum
bid rate Marginal rate  1Weighted
average rate
Date of
Settlement € million % per annumRunning for
… days
Main refinancing operations
2024 May 8 1 694 1 694 4.50 – – – 7
May 15 1 207 1 207 4.50 – – – 7
May 22 1 327 1 327 4.50 – – – 7
May 29 4 902 4 902 4.50 – – – 7
Jun. 5 2 327 2 327 4.50 – – – 7
Jun. 12 2 178 2 178 4.25 – – – 7
Long-term refinancing operations
2024 Mar. 27 4 663 4 663 2      … – – − 91
May 2 355 355 2      … – – − 90
May 29 1 170 1 170 2      … – – − 91
* Source: ECB.  1 Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or
collected.  2 Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at: a) the
average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of thisoperation including a spread or b) the average deposit facility rate over the life of this
operation.
3. Money market rates, by month
% per annum
EURIBOR ®  2
Monthly
average €STR  1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Twelve-month funds
2023 Oct. 3.901 3.880 3.860 3.970 4.120 4.160
Nov. 3.902 3.874 3.841 3.972 4.065 4.022
Dec. 3.902 3.858 3.858 3.935 3.927 3.679
2024 Jan. 3.904 3.874 3.869 3.925 3.892 3.609
Feb. 3.907 3.878 3.868 3.923 3.901 3.671
Mar. 3.907 3.873 3.853 3.923 3.895 3.718
Apr. 3.908 3.868 3.853 3.885 3.838 3.703
May 3.907 3.881 3.816 3.813 3.787 3.680
* Publication does not establish an entitlement to provision of the rates. The Deutsche
Bundesbank reserves the right to cease publishing the information on its website in
future. All data are supplied without liability. No explicit or implicit assurances or
guarantees are made as to the up-to-dateness, accuracy, timeliness, completeness,
marketability or suitability of the data as interest rates or reference interest rates.
Neither the European Money Markets Institute (EMMI), nor Euribor EBF, nor Euribor
ACI, nor the Euribor Panel Banks, nor the Euribor Steering Committee, nor the
European Central Bank, nor Reuters, nor the Deutsche Bundesbank can be held liable
for any irregularity or inaccuracy, incompleteness or late provision of the money market
rates. With regard to the €STR please consider the European Central Bank's disclaimer,
which also applies for the Deutsche Bundesbank's publication:
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/financial_markets_and_interest_rates/euro_short-
term_rate/html/index.en.html
1 Euro Short-Term Rate: On the basis of individual euro-denominated transactions
conducted and settled on the previous business day, the European Central Bankpublishes the €STR since 2 October 2019. Transactions are reported by euro area banks
subject to reporting obligations in compliance with Money Market Statistical Reporting
Regulation. Monthly averages are calculations by Deutsche Bundesbank.  2 Monthly
averages are own calculations by Deutsche Bundesbank based on Euribor® daily rates
calculated by the European Money Markets Institute (EMMI). These are unweighted
averages. Information on the methodology of Euribor® daily rates are available below.
Please be aware that commercial use of these data is only possible with a licence
agreement with the European Money Markets Institute (EMMI). Information on its
terms of use are available under the link below. Values calculated from November 2023
onwards with three decimal places. Previous values calculated with two decimal places.
For technical reasons, these values are also displayed with three decimal places and the
third decimal place is filled with a 0. Up to and including October 2023 all values
calculated and published with two decimal places
https://www.emmi-benchmarks.eu/terms-of-use
https://www.emmi-benchmarks.eu/benchmarks/euribor/

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
44•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
a) Outstanding amounts o
Households' deposits Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2023 Apr. 1.91 157,796 0.89 224,586 2.44 155,233 1.12 22,140
May 2.07 180,323 0.90 225,884 2.65 153,693 1.17 22,199
June 2.23 200,501 0.91 226,645 2.86 162,035 1.20 22,133
July 2.37 222,529 0.92 227,182 3.01 168,874 1.24 21,619
Aug. 2.52 246,001 0.94 228,521 3.15 180,132 1.27 21,610
Sep. 2.61 262,537 0.95 229,285 3.27 181,385 1.28 21,507
Oct. 2.76 288,227 0.97 230,966 3.39 197,527 1.32 21,449
Nov. 2.88 315,984 1.01 233,972 3.43 193,442 1.39 21,232
Dec. 2.96 338,959 1.04 237,917 3.47 190,801 1.43 21,697
2024 Jan. 3.01 364,579 1.06 240,513 3.51 204,092 1.46 21,689
Feb. 3.04 385,969 1.08 241,610 3.54 205,657 1.48 20,732
Mar. 3.06 400,182 1.10 242,659 3.56 212,882 1.56 20,688
Apr. 3.08 413,591 1.11 243,457 3.54 213,748 1.62 20,719
Housing loans to households  3 Loans to households for consumption and other purposes  4,5
with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2023 Apr. 4.72 3,490 2.94 26,102 1.79 1,542,767 8.86 47,023 4.05 75,742 3.72 330,568
May 4.93 3,423 3.03 25,960 1.81 1,544,206 9.12 47,513 4.14 75,472 3.77 330,677
June 5.10 3,298 3.13 25,865 1.82 1,546,102 9.25 48,284 4.24 76,260 3.83 329,576
July 5.34 3,413 3.26 25,712 1.83 1,548,159 9.45 47,192 4.35 76,468 3.90 330,500
Aug. 5.41 3,391 3.33 25,573 1.85 1,550,499 9.55 47,277 4.45 76,654 3.95 330,602
Sep. 5.49 3,233 3.38 25,315 1.86 1,553,618 9.72 47,706 4.54 76,662 3.99 329,641
Oct. 5.57 3,312 3.50 25,212 1.87 1,554,344 9.95 47,325 4.65 76,583 4.06 329,490
Nov. 5.70 3,294 3.58 24,792 1.89 1,556,410 9.99 46,653 4.74 76,885 4.09 328,941
Dec. 5.62 3,198 3.64 24,499 1.90 1,556,523 10.01 47,390 4.81 77,044 4.13 326,980
2024 Jan. 5.66 3,354 3.69 24,060 1.91 1,554,763 10.16 46,574 4.89 76,552 4.18 327,358
Feb. 5.70 3,250 3.72 23,819 1.92 1,555,595 10.18 46,259 4.97 76,486 4.22 327,721
Mar. 5.68 3,184 3.75 23,540 1.93 1,558,297 10.05 47,109 4.90 76,985 4.26 326,829
Apr. 5.65 3,289 3.78 23,271 1.94 1,559,198 10.13 46,268 4.97 76,742 4.30 327,074
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2023 Apr. 4.98 194,154 3.65 247,337 2.19 879,353
May 5.19 194,261 3.76 252,289 2.22 885,481
June 5.42 193,968 3.95 250,107 2.29 883,229
July 5.62 194,789 4.09 251,312 2.35 887,112
Aug. 5.72 188,564 4.17 251,445 2.37 889,482
Sep. 5.89 187,448 4.29 248,998 2.41 887,643
Oct. 6.05 186,407 4.42 251,931 2.45 889,648
Nov. 5.97 187,977 4.45 253,976 2.48 892,391
Dec. 6.05 180,730 4.50 255,561 2.51 891,507
2024 Jan. 6.06 183,005 4.53 255,411 2.52 893,128
Feb. 6.00 184,401 4.64 253,221 2.55 896,388
Mar. 6.04 189,482 4.63 249,544 2.56 895,185
Apr. 5.97 188,130 4.72 248,220 2.58 897,353
* The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate
statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the related volumes of
euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non-financial corporations
domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises individuals (including sole
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations
include all enterprises other than insurance corporations, banks and other financial
institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional.
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the
Bundesbank’s website (Statistics/Money and capital markets/Interest rates and
yields/Interest rates on deposits and loans).  o The statistics on outstanding amounts are
collected at the end of the month.  1 The effective interest rates are calculated either asannualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation
methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related
charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents,
guarantees and credit insurance.  2 Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics.
3 Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home
improvements; including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim
credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name
and for their own account.  4 Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for
the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services.  5 For the
purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as
business, debt consolidation, education, etc.  6 Including overdrafts (see also footnotes
12 to 14 on p. 47 ).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
45•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Households' deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice  8 of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2023 Apr. 0.22 1,807,037 2.33 28,088 2.47 3,409 2.35 2,055 0.35 470,731 0.96 28,261
May 0.30 1,792,902 2.58 35,359 2.67 4,281 2.39 2,371 0.39 460,587 1.13 30,499
June 0.34 1,782,329 2.78 34,870 2.91 4,260 2.53 1,999 0.43 450,713 1.28 33,163
July 0.41 1,773,505 2.94 38,938 2.98 3,412 2.59 2,044 0.50 440,519 1.48 36,162
Aug. 0.51 1,757,994 3.12 46,037 3.15 4,422 2.81 2,374 0.55 429,372 1.62 38,895
Sep. 0.55 1,748,975 3.22 40,232 3.30 3,611 2.92 1,787 0.59 420,872 1.76 41,824
Oct. 0.56 1,728,935 3.40 51,187 3.46 5,558 2.99 2,743 0.64 411,490 1.94 44,837
Nov. 0.59 1,726,394 3.46 57,743 3.40 6,243 3.18 4,292 0.67 400,980 2.09 48,268
Dec. 0.60 1,731,513 3.37 49,974 3.25 4,896 3.17 4,389 0.69 396,006 2.17 50,818
2024 Jan. 0.62 1,702,116 3.27 56,368 3.13 5,846 2.80 3,300 0.71 386,987 2.25 53,387
Feb. 0.58 1,698,248 3.28 55,090 3.04 5,651 2.65 2,339 0.72 379,659 2.30 55,755
Mar. 0.60 1,698,313 3.27 47,225 2.94 3,315 2.53 2,283 0.74 373,900 2.35 57,421
Apr. 0.60 1,698,135 3.21 52,193 2.95 3,789 2.76 2,954 0.75 368,393 2.38 58,350
Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2023 Apr. 0.48 558,564 2.82 79,535 3.14 655 2.83 210
May 0.55 558,743 3.01 81,462 2.86 625 2.64 225
June 0.63 548,727 3.20 88,967 3.48 703 2.90 206
July 0.72 551,199 3.34 79,832 3.53 614 3.26 252
Aug. 0.81 548,242 3.50 89,027 3.46 570 2.93 210
Sep. 0.92 548,230 3.64 95,610 3.63 807 2.96 287
Oct. 0.97 551,400 3.74 95,412 3.78 752 2.97 266
Nov. 1.02 556,270 3.73 99,933 3.71 820 3.30 418
Dec. 1.02 553,882 3.71 92,454 3.47 855 2.98 343
2024 Jan. 1.05 535,302 3.71 91,219 3.20 419 2.81 401
Feb. 1.03 524,848 3.70 94,014 3.16 527 2.90 239
Mar. 1.01 525,597 3.74 109,518 3.29 608 3.60 538
Apr. 1.01 528,909 3.74 109,504 3.46 815 3.68 573
Loans to households
Loans for consumption  4 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2023 Apr. 8.10 7.99 7,348 8.87 1,351 9.77 278 6.69 2,551 8.62 4,519
May 8.13 8.07 8,269 9.00 1,505 9.98 296 6.79 2,819 8.66 5,154
June 8.05 7.99 9,277 9.15 1,568 10.32 316 6.62 3,493 8.72 5,468
July 8.40 8.35 8,628 9.32 1,609 10.92 295 7.04 2,974 8.94 5,359
Aug. 8.46 8.43 8,818 9.46 1,689 10.65 288 7.13 3,011 9.02 5,518
Sep. 8.57 8.47 8,036 9.53 1,530 10.21 274 7.18 2,798 9.11 4,964
Oct. 8.66 8.55 8,347 9.62 1,655 9.43 288 7.21 2,893 9.24 5,166
Nov. 8.72 8.55 8,130 9.70 1,626 8.45 329 7.29 2,863 9.29 4,938
Dec. 8.69 8.25 6,106 9.28 905 7.99 298 7.22 2,491 9.04 3,317
2024 Jan. 8.73 8.49 8,062 9.55 1,563 7.86 261 7.30 2,718 9.16 5,082
Feb. 8.56 8.34 8,245 9.24 1,308 7.86 262 7.24 2,909 8.99 5,073
Mar. 8.27 8.03 8,175 9.22 1,248 8.15 259 6.87 3,170 8.80 4,745
Apr. 8.34 8.07 9,082 9.32 1,348 7.46 321 6.91 3,581 8.91 5,180
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnote x see p. 47●. + For deposits with
an agreed maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card
debt: new business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial
corporations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted
average rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. For
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts,
credit card debt: new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for
the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending business atthe end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average rates of
interest.  7 Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form the
underlying total using a grossing-up procedure.  8 Including non-financial corporations’
deposits; including fidelity and growth premiums.  9 Excluding overdrafts.  10 Annual
percentage rate of charge, which contains other related charges which may occur for
enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit
insurance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
46•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd)
Loans to households for other purposes  5 with an initial rate fixation of
Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Loans to households 
2023 Apr. 4.64 3,803 4.45 1,210 4.76 1,767 4.92 744 4.31 1,292
May 4.83 3,400 4.62 997 5.08 1,511 5.10 710 4.37 1,179
June 4.93 4,341 4.68 1,388 5.26 1,974 5.19 892 4.33 1,475
July 4.96 4,086 4.54 1,161 5.39 1,766 5.12 933 4.31 1,387
Aug. 5.16 3,430 5.02 882 5.72 1,290 5.24 910 4.50 1,230
Sep. 5.24 3,526 5.08 814 5.76 1,489 5.29 848 4.54 1,189
Oct. 5.45 3,348 5.37 1,068 5.95 1,483 5.57 724 4.73 1,141
Nov. 5.43 3,152 5.13 765 5.90 1,345 5.53 764 4.76 1,043
Dec. 5.20 4,287 5.21 988 5.77 1,719 5.12 1,234 4.54 1,334
2024 Jan. 5.23 3,673 5.02 1,102 5.78 1,717 5.26 823 4.38 1,133
Feb. 5.13 2,997 5.13 703 5.73 1,237 5.24 675 4.36 1,085
Mar. 4.91 3,988 5.08 952 5.68 1,521 5.16 814 4.07 1,653
Apr. 5.05 3,544 4.99 1,093 5.67 1,314 5.26 891 4.30 1,339
    of which: Loans to sole proprietors
2023 Apr. 4.77 2,657 . . 4.90 1,207 5.01 575 4.44 875
May 4.98 2,473 . . 5.28 1,072 5.24 547 4.44 854
June 5.04 3,178 . . 5.36 1,535 5.36 633 4.35 1,010
July 5.09 2,963 . . 5.48 1,337 5.48 592 4.37 1,034
Aug. 5.30 2,381 . . 5.91 934 5.55 551 4.53 896
Sep. 5.32 2,459 . . 5.80 1,094 5.57 523 4.55 842
Oct. 5.52 2,472 . . 6.03 1,094 5.67 547 4.74 831
Nov. 5.52 2,249 . . 6.06 900 5.60 587 4.82 762
Dec. 5.42 2,861 . . 5.93 1,256 5.58 660 4.63 945
2024 Jan. 5.33 2,814 . . 5.88 1,335 5.34 656 4.42 823
Feb. 5.22 2,274 . . 5.82 908 5.40 573 4.40 793
Mar. 4.96 3,189 . . 5.75 1,214 5.26 699 4.05 1,276
Apr. 5.08 2,756 . . 5.70 962 5.39 760 4.27 1,034
Loans to households (cont'd)
Housing loans  3 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 yearsover 5 year and
up to 10 years over 10 years
Erhebungs-
zeitraumAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2023 Apr. 3.98 3.93 12,999 4.06 2,870 4.63 2,109 4.23 1,276 3.70 4,471 3.77 5,144
May 3.99 3.94 13,657 3.92 2,945 4.82 2,148 4.27 1,359 3.66 5,038 3.76 5,112
June 4.12 4.06 13,983 4.28 2,565 5.05 2,301 4.38 1,450 3.73 4,986 3.84 5,246
July 4.08 4.02 14,335 4.03 2,845 5.20 1,949 4.37 1,469 3.71 5,352 3.82 5,564
Aug. 4.19 4.14 14,386 4.43 2,611 5.29 2,198 4.53 1,388 3.81 5,275 3.89 5,525
Sep. 4.17 4.12 12,286 4.32 2,017 5.40 1,523 4.48 1,171 3.89 4,534 3.85 5,058
Oct. 4.22 4.18 13,831 4.39 2,853 5.53 1,989 4.53 1,403 3.85 5,304 3.90 5,136
Nov. 4.27 4.22 13,473 4.56 2,236 5.62 1,723 4.61 1,588 3.92 4,936 3.92 5,225
Dec. 4.12 4.05 12,151 4.32 2,055 5.56 1,576 4.44 1,553 3.80 4,349 3.65 4,672
2024 Jan. 3.90 3.85 14,667 4.10 2,844 5.44 1,862 4.08 1,584 3.56 5,397 3.55 5,825
Feb. 3.92 3.88 14,245 4.30 2,429 5.41 1,783 4.04 1,612 3.59 5,153 3.61 5,697
Mar. 3.88 3.83 15,430 4.01 2,256 5.28 1,738 4.09 1,753 3.55 5,411 3.61 6,527
Apr. 3.91 3.86 16,792 4.21 2,754 5.45 1,868 4.07 1,868 3.57 6,234 3.64 6,822
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2023 Apr. . 3.79 5,967 . . 4.61 824 4.02 601 3.59 2,141 3.62 2,401
May . 3.82 5,821 . . 4.68 789 4.14 629 3.59 2,225 3.66 2,178
June . 3.85 6,185 . . 4.81 836 4.13 648 3.61 2,314 3.67 2,387
July . 3.88 6,592 . . 5.08 729 4.20 661 3.63 2,384 3.72 2,818
Aug. . 3.96 6,467 . . 5.10 767 4.29 637 3.73 2,399 3.75 2,664
Sep. . 3.93 5,704 . . 5.36 540 4.32 551 3.78 2,092 3.65 2,521
Oct. . 4.01 6,207 . . 5.44 769 4.38 587 3.73 2,335 3.76 2,516
Nov. . 4.02 6,174 . . 5.50 669 4.45 728 3.80 2,170 3.70 2,607
Dec. . 3.86 5,588 . . 5.39 612 4.29 609 3.73 1,935 3.47 2,432
2024 Jan. . 3.69 7,051 . . 5.34 706 3.96 746 3.44 2,461 3.45 3,138
Feb. . 3.70 6,827 . . 5.33 717 3.82 764 3.43 2,314 3.50 3,032
Mar. . 3.66 7,317 . . 5.00 736 3.91 761 3.43 2,489 3.49 3,331
Apr. . 3.74 7,897 . . 5.48 782 3.88 853 3.48 2,770 3.53 3,492
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
footnote 11, see p. 47●.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
47•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which: of which:
Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13Extended
credit card debtRevolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2023 Apr. 9.78 38,352 9.76 27,177 17.13 6,407 5.44 99,534 5.47 99,094
May 9.98 38,906 10.10 27,431 17.19 6,478 5.61 99,175 5.63 98,709
June 10.11 39,692 10.30 28,067 17.23 6,528 5.83 99,351 5.86 98,897
July 10.32 38,818 10.48 27,182 17.58 6,580 6.00 98,185 6.03 97,770
Aug. 10.39 39,026 10.60 27,146 17.79 6,611 6.11 94,939 6.14 94,514
Sep. 10.59 39,548 10.75 27,976 17.86 6,629 6.25 95,468 6.28 95,004
Oct. 10.82 39,186 11.02 27,570 18.09 6,656 6.42 94,418 6.45 93,913
Nov. 10.80 38,416 10.95 26,932 18.18 6,614 6.41 95,688 6.44 95,191
Dec. 10.76 39,266 11.03 27,422 18.17 6,609 6.49 92,617 6.52 92,164
2024 Jan. 11.03 38,673 11.19 27,497 18.22 6,534 6.48 93,839 6.51 93,367
Feb. 11.06 38,233 11.22 27,163 18.29 6,460 6.47 95,704 6.50 95,225
Mar. 10.89 39,566 11.17 27,767 18.66 6,459 6.48 97,035 6.51 96,538
Apr. 11.00 38,415 11.19 27,036 18.65 6,438 6.37 96,516 6.40 96,014
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which: Loans up to €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of Loans over €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of
TotalRenegotiated
loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 yearsfloating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2023 Apr. 4.45 73,584 4.46 23,051 5.24 9,722 5.84 1,572 4.32 999 4.36 51,380 4.18 3,476 3.77 6,435
May 4.65 79,772 4.62 21,546 5.37 11,322 6.13 1,607 4.22 1,060 4.59 55,568 4.00 3,590 4.00 6,625
June 4.88 100,910 4.89 33,256 5.58 12,583 6.39 1,760 4.31 1,219 4.85 72,375 4.70 4,371 3.95 8,602
July 5.06 85,629 4.88 28,176 6.39 10,764 6.54 1,838 4.35 1,167 4.91 61,061 5.32 3,989 3.94 6,810
Aug. 5.11 73,312 5.15 21,335 6.01 10,015 6.63 1,698 4.46 999 5.06 51,942 4.47 3,017 3.95 5,641
Sep. 5.16 83,317 5.30 25,702 6.04 10,804 6.76 1,689 4.35 959 5.09 60,497 5.03 3,077 4.10 6,291
Oct. 5.39 76,734 5.27 24,750 6.35 10,963 6.93 1,781 4.61 912 5.30 54,862 5.02 3,674 4.11 4,542
Nov. 5.17 79,316 5.28 22,467 6.27 10,430 6.87 1,838 4.50 936 5.07 56,524 4.66 3,644 4.10 5,944
Dec. 5.19 108,487 5.34 31,589 6.07 11,245 6.60 2,020 4.33 1,115 5.28 76,500 4.63 7,141 3.79 10,466
2024 Jan. 5.16 75,818 5.37 22,554 5.81 10,279 6.48 1,856 4.21 932 5.18 54,103 4.51 3,830 3.64 4,818
Feb. 5.06 72,892 5.36 18,973 5.77 10,256 6.77 1,809 4.19 879 5.19 49,631 3.29 6,114 3.85 4,203
Mar. 5.20 92,824 5.42 27,049 5.63 12,534 6.70 1,904 4.24 1,016 5.27 66,292 4.50 5,336 3.79 5,742
Apr. 5.20 79,792 5.35 23,180 5.67 9,851 6.60 3,246 4.20 1,121 5.24 56,021 4.42 4,364 3.85 5,189
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2023 Apr. 4.48 10,295 . . 4.88 452 4.52 120 3.81 269 4.71 6,760 4.81 541 3.69 2,153
May . . . . 5.06 456 4.80 108 3.80 268 . . 4.37 876 3.77 1,623
June . . . . 5.14 573 4.75 99 3.87 340 . . 5.16 1,293 3.75 1,183
July 4.86 11,078 . . 5.44 489 4.91 126 3.98 325 4.87 6,823 5.86 1,544 3.94 1,771
Aug. 5.08 9,797 . . 5.58 425 5.01 122 3.85 279 5.45 6,747 4.32 890 3.79 1,334
Sep. . . . . 5.63 450 5.28 109 3.88 253 . . 5.19 1,187 3.76 1,487
Oct. 5.05 12,103 . . 5.66 508 5.14 140 3.95 213 5.21 8,840 5.38 1,005 3.73 1,397
Nov. 4.69 10,586 . . 5.73 353 4.83 107 3.88 250 4.90 7,211 4.51 1,045 3.74 1,620
Dec. 4.83 15,673 . . 5.55 459 5.01 139 3.82 291 5.22 10,040 4.81 1,915 3.45 2,829
2024 Jan. 4.78 8,277 . . 5.69 446 4.64 150 3.68 250 5.04 5,880 4.09 707 3.41 844
Feb. 4.87 7,393 . . 5.68 351 4.70 113 3.60 231 5.16 5,054 4.55 846 3.45 798
Mar. 5.03 11,402 . . 5.74 411 4.91 99 3.75 277 5.23 8,142 5.34 1,258 3.39 1,215
Apr. 4.80 8,877 . . 5.61 457 4.89 159 3.69 272 4.91 5,944 5.13 1,001 3.77 1,044
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
11 For the purposes of the interest rate statistics, a loan is considered to be secured if
collateral (amongst others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at
least the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned.
12 Including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower
may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior
notice to the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as
funds are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no
obligation of regular repayment of funds.  13 Overdrafts are defined as debit balanceson current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are
within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank.  14 Including
convenience and extended credit card debt. Convenience credit is defined as the credit
granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period between payment transactions effected
with the card during one billing cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this
specific billing cycle become due.  15 The amount category refers to the single loan
transaction considered as new business.  x Dominated by the business of one or two
banks. Therefore, the value cannot be published due to confidentiality.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
48•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets
€ billion
End of
year/quarter TotalCurrency
and
deposits  1Debt
securities Loans  2Shares and
other equityInvestment
fund
shares/unitsFinancial
derivativesTechnical
reserves  3Non-financial
assetsRemaining
assets
Insurance corporations 
2021 Q2 2,609.9 280.5 470.3 361.2 449.2 879.6 3.4 72.5 38.9 54.2
Q3 2,653.1 271.7 474.2 358.2 463.4 899.8 3.3 87.8 38.3 56.3
Q4 2,667.2 261.3 468.6 355.1 472.4 921.6 3.2 85.0 40.8 59.3
2022 Q1 2,547.3 243.7 440.2 333.2 468.7 870.5 2.7 87.5 41.0 59.8
Q2 2,369.7 215.6 390.3 305.5 462.5 803.5 3.0 85.5 41.3 62.5
Q3 2,296.2 202.0 369.9 289.1 461.2 776.7 4.0 84.2 41.4 67.6
Q4 2,274.7 189.5 373.7 279.7 465.8 772.2 3.4 79.5 38.7 72.2
2023 Q1 2,326.9 201.7 380.8 280.2 472.3 790.3 3.6 85.2 38.5 74.4
Q2 2,330.1 194.7 383.3 280.0 474.3 799.0 3.6 84.1 38.1 73.0
Q3 2,305.3 186.0 376.1 273.3 480.9 783.5 3.7 88.9 38.2 74.7
Q4 2,408.4 190.2 405.6 291.0 499.7 822.6 3.3 79.0 34.2 83.0
    Life insurance
2021 Q2 1,384.9 164.4 234.1 219.4 78.0 637.6 2.0 14.1 21.5 13.8
Q3 1,400.1 159.2 233.8 214.8 87.7 654.6 1.9 13.4 20.8 13.8
Q4 1,411.1 152.4 231.9 211.8 93.4 669.1 1.7 14.6 21.9 14.3
2022 Q1 1,317.7 136.8 211.5 193.1 99.7 626.1 0.9 13.9 22.0 13.8
Q2 1,202.1 120.5 180.3 173.1 104.2 569.4 0.9 13.6 22.1 17.9
Q3 1,149.6 110.2 166.6 162.1 107.0 546.4 1.1 12.3 22.3 21.7
Q4 1,130.1 103.6 170.5 155.6 111.4 540.0 1.1 11.5 19.5 16.8
2023 Q1 1,147.9 105.1 170.4 155.6 113.3 553.4 1.0 12.1 19.4 17.5
Q2 1,153.6 102.8 171.7 154.9 114.3 559.4 1.0 12.1 19.3 18.1
Q3 1,120.9 97.6 162.9 149.1 115.7 545.2 1.5 11.8 19.1 18.0
Q4 1,180.4 101.5 178.7 161.0 116.6 574.7 1.4 10.3 16.6 19.5
    Non-life insurance
2021 Q2 724.6 103.3 141.0 83.4 90.5 225.7 0.4 40.3 12.7 27.2
Q3 733.1 98.7 141.0 83.8 93.7 228.4 0.4 46.4 12.8 27.7
Q4 738.4 94.6 140.1 84.7 97.5 234.3 0.3 44.6 14.0 28.4
2022 Q1 722.4 91.4 133.4 80.8 98.5 227.7 0.2 45.7 13.9 30.7
Q2 681.6 81.9 122.0 74.8 98.6 216.5 0.1 44.0 14.1 29.5
Q3 661.1 76.2 116.0 70.3 99.2 212.2 0.1 43.1 14.1 29.7
Q4 659.0 72.7 115.2 69.1 99.8 215.5 0.2 42.4 14.2 30.1
2023 Q1 687.2 81.3 121.2 69.5 102.7 219.8 0.1 45.2 14.2 33.2
Q2 687.1 77.2 123.9 70.3 103.1 222.4 0.1 45.1 14.1 30.9
Q3 679.6 73.6 122.3 68.6 104.5 221.2 0.1 45.6 14.3 29.4
Q4 708.0 74.9 131.9 74.1 109.0 230.1 0.1 43.9 13.0 31.1
    Reinsurance 4
2021 Q2 500.4 12.8 95.2 58.4 280.7 16.4 1.0 18.1 4.6 13.2
Q3 519.9 13.9 99.3 59.6 282.0 16.7 1.0 28.0 4.7 14.8
Q4 517.7 14.3 96.6 58.6 281.4 18.2 1.1 25.9 4.9 16.7
2022 Q1 507.1 15.5 95.3 59.3 270.4 16.7 1.6 27.9 5.0 15.3
Q2 486.0 13.2 88.0 57.5 259.6 17.6 1.9 27.9 5.1 15.1
Q3 485.5 15.6 87.3 56.7 255.1 18.1 2.7 28.8 5.1 16.2
Q4 485.6 13.2 88.0 55.0 254.6 16.7 2.1 25.7 5.0 25.3
2023 Q1 491.8 15.3 89.2 55.0 256.3 17.1 2.4 27.8 4.8 23.7
Q2 489.5 14.7 87.6 54.8 256.9 17.2 2.5 26.9 4.8 24.0
Q3 504.9 14.8 90.9 55.5 260.7 17.1 2.1 31.6 4.8 27.3
Q4 520.0 13.7 95.0 55.9 274.1 17.8 1.8 24.7 4.6 32.4
Pension funds 5
2021 Q2 683.2 85.0 60.2 49.3 11.2 445.2 0.1 12.1 17.8 2.3
Q3 689.8 82.9 60.4 48.9 11.8 453.6 0.1 12.2 17.8 2.2
Q4 709.9 82.1 60.0 48.7 11.2 473.5 0.1 12.4 18.5 3.3
2022 Q1 689.0 75.7 56.6 46.2 11.9 465.3 0.0 12.5 18.5 2.2
Q2 664.2 70.2 52.8 43.2 12.3 452.2 0.0 12.4 18.6 2.5
Q3 654.6 67.6 51.8 42.0 12.7 446.0 0.0 13.2 18.7 2.6
Q4 660.9 67.3 53.0 41.8 12.8 450.2 0.0 13.6 18.8 3.4
2023 Q1 666.3 65.8 56.6 42.0 13.6 453.5 0.0 13.5 18.8 2.6
Q2 674.7 67.9 59.1 42.6 13.7 456.5 0.0 13.5 18.9 2.5
Q3 669.9 67.3 59.8 42.0 14.0 451.5 0.1 13.4 19.1 2.6
Q4 699.6 70.5 67.2 44.0 14.4 467.3 0.1 13.6 19.6 2.9
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections.  1 Accounts receivable to monetary financial institutions, including
registered bonds, borrower's note loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including
deposits retained on assumed reinsurance as well as registered bonds, borrower's note
loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  3 Including reinsurance recoverables and claims ofpension funds on pension managers.  4 Not including the reinsurance business
conducted by primary insurers, which is included there.  5 The term "pension funds"
refers to the institutional sector "pension funds" of the European System of Accounts.
Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational pension
schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
49•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
2. Liabilities
€ billion
Technical reserves
End of
year/quarter TotalDebt
securities
issued Loans  1Shares and
other equity Total  2Life/
pension
entitlements  3 Non-lifeFinancial
derivativesRemaining
liabilities Net worth  6
Insurance corporations
2021 Q2 2,609.9 33.0 81.3 558.7 1,793.5 1,556.3 237.1 2.2 141.1 –
Q3 2,653.1 35.4 82.8 567.0 1,817.7 1,569.1 248.7 2.5 147.6 –
Q4 2,667.2 36.0 81.9 579.3 1,820.7 1,578.3 242.3 2.5 146.8 –
2022 Q1 2,547.3 34.4 82.1 563.1 1,725.9 1,472.6 253.3 4.0 137.7 –
Q2 2,369.7 33.6 78.7 541.6 1,574.4 1,326.8 247.5 6.0 135.3 –
Q3 2,296.2 33.8 73.6 537.4 1,506.0 1,262.3 243.7 7.4 138.0 –
Q4 2,274.7 32.3 70.1 543.7 1,486.5 1,248.7 237.8 5.6 136.5 –
2023 Q1 2,326.9 33.1 71.2 544.7 1,539.1 1,277.1 261.9 4.4 134.4 –
Q2 2,330.1 33.2 68.4 546.7 1,543.8 1,283.7 260.1 4.5 133.6 –
Q3 2,305.3 35.3 76.8 549.1 1,505.3 1,245.0 260.3 4.8 134.1 –
Q4 2,408.4 30.5 73.2 569.8 1,586.6 1,325.4 261.2 4.1 144.1 –
    Life insurance
2021 Q2 1,384.9 3.3 20.4 144.2 1,164.9 1,164.9 – 1.0 51.1 –
Q3 1,400.1 3.3 19.3 148.1 1,176.4 1,176.4 – 1.1 51.9 –
Q4 1,411.1 3.3 20.7 148.2 1,185.5 1,185.5 – 0.9 52.5 –
2022 Q1 1,317.7 3.2 19.9 142.9 1,101.6 1,101.6 – 1.4 48.8 –
Q2 1,202.1 3.1 19.0 141.4 984.5 984.5 – 2.7 51.3 –
Q3 1,149.6 3.0 17.0 138.0 936.9 936.9 – 3.1 51.8 –
Q4 1,130.1 2.7 16.6 136.0 924.9 924.9 – 2.3 47.7 –
2023 Q1 1,147.9 2.8 17.8 133.0 945.8 945.8 – 1.9 46.6 –
Q2 1,153.6 2.7 17.5 133.8 950.9 950.9 – 1.8 46.9 –
Q3 1,120.9 2.7 16.8 134.1 917.2 917.2 – 2.5 47.6 –
Q4 1,180.4 0.8 17.7 133.3 977.7 977.7 – 2.0 48.8 –
    Non-life insurance
2021 Q2 724.6 1.2 10.5 166.2 493.4 366.2 127.1 0.1 53.1 –
Q3 733.1 1.2 10.5 168.9 498.7 367.8 130.9 0.2 53.7 –
Q4 738.4 1.4 10.7 175.8 492.6 367.6 125.0 0.2 57.8 –
2022 Q1 722.4 1.3 11.7 173.1 483.0 347.1 135.9 0.3 53.0 –
Q2 681.6 1.2 11.1 167.6 451.9 322.7 129.2 0.5 49.2 –
Q3 661.1 1.2 10.5 167.9 430.4 307.4 123.0 0.5 50.5 –
Q4 659.0 1.2 10.4 170.2 425.1 306.7 118.4 0.4 51.7 –
2023 Q1 687.2 1.2 10.7 173.0 451.0 314.4 136.7 0.4 51.0 –
Q2 687.1 1.2 10.6 174.6 451.2 317.0 134.2 0.3 49.1 –
Q3 679.6 1.7 10.9 173.8 444.2 312.6 131.5 0.4 48.7 –
Q4 708.0 0.6 12.5 180.2 461.3 333.6 127.7 0.3 53.3 –
    Reinsurance 4
2021 Q2 500.4 28.5 50.4 248.3 135.2 25.2 110.0 1.1 36.9 –
Q3 519.9 30.9 53.0 250.1 142.7 24.9 117.8 1.3 42.0 –
Q4 517.7 31.4 50.5 255.3 142.6 25.3 117.3 1.4 36.5 –
2022 Q1 507.1 30.0 50.4 247.2 141.3 23.9 117.4 2.3 35.9 –
Q2 486.0 29.3 48.6 232.6 138.0 19.6 118.4 2.8 34.7 –
Q3 485.5 29.7 46.2 231.5 138.7 18.0 120.7 3.8 35.7 –
Q4 485.6 28.4 43.1 237.5 136.5 17.1 119.4 2.9 37.1 –
2023 Q1 491.8 29.2 42.8 238.7 142.2 17.0 125.3 2.1 36.8 –
Q2 489.5 29.3 40.2 238.3 141.7 15.8 125.9 2.4 37.6 –
Q3 504.9 31.0 49.2 241.2 143.9 15.2 128.7 1.9 37.8 –
Q4 520.0 29.1 43.0 256.3 147.7 14.2 133.5 1.8 42.0 –
Pension funds 5
2021 Q2 683.2 – 1.8 31.3 536.7 535.0 – 0.2 9.2 104.0
Q3 689.8 – 1.9 31.9 539.8 537.6 – 0.2 9.3 106.8
Q4 709.9 – 1.9 32.0 560.2 557.3 – 0.1 8.9 106.8
2022 Q1 689.0 – 2.0 26.8 559.0 556.8 – 0.1 11.2 89.9
Q2 664.2 – 1.8 23.4 559.7 558.1 – 0.1 11.6 67.7
Q3 654.6 – 1.9 21.2 561.1 560.2 – 0.1 13.0 57.2
Q4 660.9 – 1.8 24.3 580.8 580.5 – 0.1 11.5 42.5
2023 Q1 666.3 – 1.8 24.8 580.2 579.9 – 0.1 11.5 47.9
Q2 674.7 – 1.8 24.7 585.6 585.3 – 0.1 11.6 50.9
Q3 669.9 – 1.8 24.8 586.6 586.3 – 0.1 11.7 45.0
Q4 699.6 – 1.8 26.1 600.4 600.1 – 0.1 11.8 59.4
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections.  1 Including deposits retained on ceded business as well as registered
bonds, borrower's note loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including claims of pension
funds on pension managers and entitlements to non-pension benefits.  3 Technical
reserves "life" taking account of transitional measures. Health insurance is also includedin the "non-life insurance" sector.  4 Not including the reinsurance business conducted
by primary insurers, which is included there.  5 Valuation at book values. The term "pen-
sion funds" refers to the institutional sector "pension funds" of the European System of
Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational
pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included.  6 Own
funds correspond to the sum of "Net worth" and "Shares and other equity".

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
50•
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases TotalBank
debt
securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt
secur-
itiesForeign
debt
secur-
ities  3 Total  4Credit in-
stitutions
including
building
and loan
associations  5Deutsche
BundesbankOther
sectors  6Non-
residents  7
2012 51,813 –21,419 –98,820 – 8,701 86,103 73,231 – 3,767 – 42,017 – 3,573 41,823 55,581
2013 – 15,971 –101,616 –117,187 153 15,415 85,645 16,409 – 25,778 – 12,708 54,895 – 32,379
2014 58,735 –31,962 –47,404 – 1,330 16,776 90,697 44,384 – 12,124 – 11,951 68,459 14,351
2015 15,219 –36,010 –65,778 26,762 3,006 51,229 99,225 – 66,330 121,164 44,391 – 84,006
2016 68,998 27,429 19,177 18,265 –10,012 41,569 161,776 – 58,012 187,500 32,288 – 92,778
2017 51,034 11,563 1,096 7,112 3,356 39,471 134,192 – 71,454 161,012 44,634 – 83,158
2018 78,657 16,630 33,251 12,433 –29,055 62,027 107,155 – 24,417 67,328 64,244 – 28,499
2019 139,611 68,536 29,254 32,505 6,778 71,075 60,195 8,059 2,408 49,728 79,416
2020 451,481 374,034 14,462 88,703 270,870 77,446 280,820 18,955 226,887 34,978 170,661
2021 230,854 221,648 31,941 19,754 169,953 9,205 243,497 – 41,852 245,198 40,150 – 12,643
2022 150,974 156,190 59,322 35,221 61,648 – 5,216 143,527 2,915 49,774 90,839 7,447
2023 289,352 158,228 88,018 –11,899 82,109 131,124 126,229 32,163 – 59,817 153,883 163,123
2023 May 47,402 34,077 28,468 3,010 2,599 13,325 10,867 1,206 – 1,655 11,315 36,536
June 42,277 22,910 – 6,490 5,312 24,089 19,366 35,553 16,773 – 8,853 27,632 6,724
July 28,670 27,889 981 – 79 26,987 781 2,548 – 8,514 324 10,738 26,122
Aug. 17,661 10,967 10,278 – 1,708 2,397 6,694 3,128 503 – 9,067 11,691 14,533
Sep. 19,604 16,310 – 7,089 6,461 16,938 3,294 – 4,880 – 8,020 – 11,311 14,451 24,484
Oct. – 20,618 –19,390 1,677 –10,955 –10,113 – 1,227 – 13,989 – 4,855 – 6,759 – 2,375 – 6,628
Nov. 28,453 18,861 9,439 – 3,337 12,759 9,592 9,557 10,752 – 5,186 3,992 18,896
Dec. – 20,319 –27,517 4,368 – 8,386 –23,499 7,199 – 8,134 – 7,024 – 5,130 4,020 – 12,185
2024 Jan. 30,652 25,509 8,437 6,301 10,771 5,143 6,259 17,106 – 7,128 – 3,718 24,392
Feb. 19,146 11,577 6,463 – 957 6,070 7,569 3,675 7,562 – 9,079 5,191 15,471
Mar. 42,591 15,188 13,915 3,072 – 1,799 27,402 19,477 16,349 – 4,776 7,905 23,113
Apr. – 28,678 –25,312 –10,737 6,371 –20,946 – 3,366 – 33,128 – 4,492 – 12,041 – 16,595 4,449
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
purchasesDomestic
shares  8Foreign
shares  9 Total  10Credit insti-
tutions  5 Other sectors  11Non-
residents  12
2012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 656
2013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,337 11,991 5,346 2,851
2014 43,488 18,778 24,710 43,930 17,203 26,727 – 443
2015 56,979 7,668 49,311 46,721 – 5,421 52,142 10,258
2016 39,133 4,409 34,724 39,265 – 5,143 44,408 – 132
2017 52,932 15,570 37,362 51,270 7,031 44,239 1,662
2018 61,400 16,188 45,212 89,624 – 11,184 100,808 – 28,224
2019 54,830 9,076 45,754 43,070 – 1,119 44,189 11,759
2020 78,464 17,771 60,693 111,570 27 111,543 – 33,106
2021 115,933 49,066 66,868 102,921 10,869 92,052 13,012
2022 – 6,275 27,792 – 34,066 2,997 – 8,262 11,259 – 9,272
2023 41,999 36,898 5,101 52,912 14,650 38,262 – 10,913
2023 May – 837 592 – 1,429 1,814 – 2,497 4,311 – 2,651
June – 4,707 1,067 – 5,774 – 525 – 3,322 2,797 – 4,182
July 6,873 478 6,396 3,534 – 136 3,670 3,340
Aug. 766 1,474 – 707 3,833 – 893 4,726 – 3,067
Sep. – 4,577 687 – 5,265 – 3,470 1,962 – 5,432 – 1,107
Oct. 564 583 – 18 3,007 – 88 3,095 – 2,442
Nov. 591 301 290 – 2,437 538 – 2,975 3,028
Dec. 27,982 24,942 3,039 26,378 6,437 19,941 1,604
2024 Jan. 282 351 – 69 2,171 – 1,361 3,532 – 1,888
Feb. – 856 206 – 1,062 – 626 4,247 – 4,873 – 230
Mar. 7,233 4,679 2,554 9,297 6,657 2,640 – 2,064
Apr. 1,844 1,546 298 4,062 – 2,481 6,543 – 2,218
1 Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers' portfolios of their own debt
securities.  2 Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction values.
4 Domestic and foreign debt securities.  5 Book values; statistically adjusted.  6 Residual;
also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.
Up to end-2008 including Deutsche Bundesbank.  7 Net purchases or net sales (-) of do-
mestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction values.  8 Excluding shares of publiclimited investment companies; at issue prices.  9 Net purchases or net sales (-) of foreign
shares (including direct investment) by residents; transaction values.  10 Domestic
and foreign shares.  11 Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign
securities by domestic mutual funds.  12 Net purchases or net sales (-) of domestic
shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The figures
for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
51•
VIII. Capital market
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities  1
Period Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by special-
purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt securities
Gross sales
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,258 574,530
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,892
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,675 400,701
3 2016 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,371 416,108
3 2017 1,047,822 619,199 30,339 8,933 438,463 141,466 66,290 362,332
2018 1,148,091 703,416 38,658 5,673 534,552 124,530 91,179 353,496
2019 1,285,541 783,977 38,984 9,587 607,900 127,504 94,367 407,197
6 2020 1,870,084 778,411 39,548 18,327 643,380 77,156 184,206 907,466
2021 1,658,004 795,271 41,866 17,293 648,996 87,116 139,775 722,958
2022 1,683,265 861,989 66,811 11,929 700,062 83,188 169,680 651,596
2023 1,705,524 937,757 45,073 12,633 782,969 97,082 153,128 614,639
2023 May 169,866 97,645 4,531 760 83,511 8,844 16,336 55,885
June 171,957 84,953 3,264 1,556 70,601 9,532 21,526 65,478
July 121,578 53,812 2,876 130 43,776 7,031 14,133 53,632
Aug. 142,211 82,749 3,085 1,013 71,729 6,922 10,064 49,397
Sep. 152,408 82,679 3,337 550 71,155 7,637 18,722 51,007
Oct. 132,402 83,350 1,697 2,557 71,328 7,769 10,151 38,901
Nov. 125,657 72,915 7,203 1,354 57,521 6,837 8,850 43,892
Dec. 81,025 55,000 1,834 1,453 46,549 5,164 4,722 21,302
2024 Jan. 151,286 89,021 6,405 1,630 70,605 10,380 14,833 47,433
Feb. 148,430 79,876 3,301 2,051 63,439 11,086 7,181 61,373
Mar. 124,684 62,659 5,081 608 45,393 11,577 11,709 50,316
Apr. 150,076 84,515 5,951 1,213 66,287 11,066 13,211 52,349
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years 4
2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888
2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765
2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
3 2016 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
3 2017 357,506 170,357 22,395 6,447 94,852 46,663 44,891 142,257
2018 375,906 173,995 30,934 4,460 100,539 38,061 69,150 132,760
2019 396,617 174,390 26,832 6,541 96,673 44,346 69,682 152,544
6 2020 658,521 165,097 28,500 7,427 90,839 38,330 77,439 415,985
2021 486,335 171,799 30,767 6,336 97,816 36,880 64,234 250,303
2022 485,287 164,864 41,052 7,139 91,143 25,530 56,491 263,932
2023 482,193 155,790 28,294 4,664 101,059 21,772 44,272 282,132
2023 May 49,315 14,703 2,898 – 9,458 2,347 4,527 30,085
June 53,960 12,885 2,664 498 9,123 600 10,475 30,600
July 34,145 10,133 430 2 7,964 1,736 2,298 21,715
Aug. 36,582 12,501 2,383 1,000 8,182 936 1,656 22,425
Sep. 40,995 8,847 2,250 – 5,127 1,470 8,741 23,407
Oct. 37,642 15,411 262 20 11,876 3,253 2,456 19,775
Nov. 35,532 13,641 6,703 600 4,135 2,203 2,541 19,350
Dec. 14,764 6,401 1,040 1,205 2,551 1,605 763 7,600
2024 Jan. 55,105 23,961 5,330 537 14,875 3,219 8,244 22,900
Feb. 53,198 21,778 1,920 1,251 15,159 3,448 1,870 29,550
Mar. 44,606 12,428 4,590 606 4,928 2,304 6,478 25,700
Apr. 47,574 18,803 3,459 1,026 9,789 4,530 5,921 22,850
Net sales 5
2012 – 85,298 – 100,198 – 4,177 – 41,660 – 3,259 – 51,099 – 6,401 21,298
2013 – 140,017 – 125,932 – 17,364 – 37,778 – 4,027 – 66,760 1,394 – 15,479
2014 – 34,020 – 56,899 – 6,313 – 23,856 – 862 – 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 – 65,147 – 77,273 9,271 – 9,754 – 2,758 – 74,028 25,300 – 13,174
3 2016 21,951 10,792 2,176 – 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 – 7,020
3 2017 2,669 5,954 6,389 – 4,697 18,788 – 14,525 6,828 – 10,114
2018 2,758 26,648 19,814 – 6,564 18,850 – 5,453 9,738 – 33,630
2019 59,719 28,750 13,098 – 3,728 26,263 – 6,885 30,449 519
6 2020 473,795 28,147 8,661 8,816 22,067 – 11,398 49,536 396,113
2021 210,231 52,578 17,821 7,471 22,973 4,314 35,531 122,123
2022 135,853 36,883 23,894 – 9,399 15,944 6,444 30,671 68,299
2023 190,577 78,764 10,184 – 791 46,069 23,303 – 34 111,848
2023 May 40,674 26,575 1,932 254 20,562 3,826 2,259 11,840
June 25,517 – 7,752 – 509 11 – 9,065 1,811 7,559 25,710
July 30,229 700 – 53 110 – 502 1,146 – 734 30,263
Aug. 15,869 9,610 2,930 541 7,387 – 1,249 – 1,791 8,050
Sep. 12,991 – 6,384 28 – 809 – 4,706 – 897 8,074 11,300
Oct. – 7,927 – 1,596 – 2,527 – 1,529 – 895 3,356 – 2,197 – 4,135
Nov. 30,649 13,427 4,984 904 7,149 391 – 4,018 21,239
Dec. – 11,217 10,301 308 1,288 9,314 – 609 – 4,873 – 16,644
2024 Jan. 4,841 4,209 – 569 1,400 – 2,865 6,243 4,372 – 3,740
Feb. 12,862 7,348 1,102 1,691 – 522 5,078 – 2,312 7,827
Mar. 17,943 13,538 1,459 – 498 8,865 3,713 3,784 620
Apr. – 9,795 – 10,705 2,897 – 1,562 – 14,334 2,293 5,143 – 4,233
* For definitions, see the explanatory notes in Statistical Series - Securities Issues
Statistics on pages 43 f.  1 Excluding registered bank debt securities.  2 Including
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Sectoral reclassification of
debt securities.  4 Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue.  5 Gross sales lessredemptions.  6 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year
2020 have been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions
are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
52•
VIII. Capital market
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities
End of year
or month/
Maturity
in years Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by
special-purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)Public
debt securities
2012 3,285,422 1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
1 2016 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
1 2017 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 651,211 320,432 2 302,543 1,617,244
2018 3,091,303 1,194,160 161,088 51,439 670,062 1 311,572 1 2 313,527 1,583,616
2019 2 3,149,373 1,222,911 174,188 47,712 696,325 304,686 2 342,325 1,584,136
4 2020 2 3,545,200 2 1,174,817 183,980 55,959 687,710 2 247,169 2 379,342 1,991,040
2021 3,781,975 1,250,777 202,385 63,496 731,068 253,828 414,791 2,116,406
2022 3,930,390 1,302,028 225,854 54,199 761,047 260,928 441,234 2,187,127
2023 4,131,592 1,384,958 237,099 54,312 806,808 286,739 441,742 2,304,892
2023 May 4,027,974 1,364,889 230,966 53,237 799,875 280,811 439,299 2,223,786
June 4,052,214 1,354,415 230,474 53,223 788,438 282,281 446,780 2,251,019
July 4,077,718 1,354,010 231,454 53,389 786,384 282,783 446,064 2,277,644
Aug. 4,095,643 1,365,614 234,566 53,961 795,808 281,279 444,711 2,285,319
Sep. 4,117,795 1,365,365 234,599 53,128 796,782 280,856 453,037 2,299,393
Oct. 4,110,219 1,362,975 231,537 52,084 794,730 284,623 450,654 2,296,591
Nov. 4,139,444 1,373,679 236,596 53,034 798,461 285,588 446,199 2,319,566
Dec. 4,131,592 1,384,958 237,099 54,312 806,808 286,739 441,742 2,304,892
2024 Jan. 4,140,092 1,394,649 236,671 55,735 808,508 293,736 446,559 2,298,884
Feb. 4,152,812 1,401,409 237,658 57,450 807,692 298,609 444,310 2,307,093
Mar. 4,173,121 1,415,363 239,096 56,960 816,963 302,344 448,012 2,309,746
Apr. 4,168,149 1,407,370 241,618 55,409 805,038 305,305 453,487 2,307,292
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity 3 Position at end-April 2024
up to under 2 1 224 684   496 462   67 139   17 278   301 503   110 542   84 433   643 789 
2 to under 4  811 114   355 354   73 175   17 539   189 989   74 650   83 929   371 832 
4 to under 6  616 440   223 120   45 291   7 777   127 177   42 875   69 840   323 480 
6 to under 8  401 362   132 955   22 183   3 733   79 056   27 983   41 773   226 633 
8 to under 10  316 075   97 090   22 617   5 036   52 768   16 669   32 279   186 705 
10 to under 15  241 211   55 427   7 621   3 706   35 097   9 003   29 175   156 609 
15 to under 20  118 605   15 828   2 766    231   10 545   2 286   15 521   87 256 
20 and above  438 659   31 135    827    107   8 904   21 296   96 536   310 987 
* Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers' portfolios.  1 Sectoral
reclassification of debt securities.  2 Adjustments due to the change in the country of
residence of the issuers or debt securities.  3 Calculated from month under review until
final maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of theresidual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc.
4 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year 2020 have
been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions are not
specially marked.
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies' capital due to
PeriodShare capital =
circulation at
end of period
under reviewNet increase or
net decrease (-)
during period
under reviewcash payments
and ex-
change of
convertible
bonds  1issue of
bonus sharescontribution
of claims
and other
real assetsmerger
and
transfer
of assetschange of
legal formreduction
of capital 
and
liquidationMemo item:
Share circulation
at market values
(market capita-
lisation)
level at end
of period
under review  2
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 – 478 594 – 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 – 6,879 2,971 718 476 – 1,432 – 619 – 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 – 465 – 1,044 – 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 – 1,394 – 1,385 – 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 – 1,062 3,272 319 337 – 953 – 2,165 – 1,865 1,676,397
2017 178,828 2,471 3,894 776 533 – 457 – 661 – 1,615 1,933,733
2018 180,187 1,357 3,670 716 82 – 1,055 – 1,111 – 946 1,634,155
3 4 2019 183,461 1,673 2,411 2,419 542 – 858 – 65 – 2,775 1,950,224
4 2020 181,881 – 2,872 1,877 219 178 – 2,051 – 460 – 2,635 1,963,588
2021 186,580 4,152 9,561 672 35 – 326 – 212 – 5,578 2,301,942
2022 199,789 12,272 14,950 224 371 – 29 – 293 – 2,952 1,858,963
2023 182,246 – 15,984 3,377 3 50 – 564 – 2,515 – 16,335 2,051,675
2023 May 198,497 71 153 – –– 0 –– 82 2,048,166
June 198,505 8 422 – –– 262 – 17 – 135 2,061,065
July 198,406 – 99 52 – –– 0 – 89 – 62 2,113,570
Aug. 198,654 210 452 – –– 1 – 24 – 217 2,038,560
Sep. 198,328 – 325 280 3 –– 201 – 10 – 397 1,966,858
Oct. 198,522 194 504 – –– 100 – 2 – 208 1,852,180
Nov. 198,456 – 67 62 0 0 0 0 – 129 2,002,568
Dec. 182,246 – 16,210 677 0 0 0 – 2,366 – 14,521 2,051,675
2024 Jan. 182,103 – 144 42 0 0 – 0 – 115 – 71 2,061,708
Feb. 181,987 – 117 48 0 0 – 2 – 25 – 138 2,126,888
Mar. 182,100 113 344 0 0 – 7 – 5 – 218 2,213,065
Apr. 181,805 – 295 126 0 0 – 4 – 4 – 414 2,159,884
* Excluding shares of public limited investment companies.  1 Including shares issued
out of company profits.  2 All marketplaces. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on
data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mit teilungen and Deutsche BörseAG. 3 Methodological changes since October 2019.  4 Changes due to statistical
adjustments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
53•
VIII. Capital market
5. Yields on German securities
Issue yields Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1
Public debt securities Public debt securities Bank debt securities
Listed Federal securities
Total Totalof which:
Listed Federal
debt securitiesBank debt 
securities Total Total TotalWith a residual
maturity of
 9 to
10 years  2 TotalWith a residual
maturity of more
than 9 years and
up to 10 yearsCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)
Period % per annum
2012 1.6 1.3 1.2 1.8 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7
2013 1.6 1.3 1.2 1.8 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4
2014 1.2 1.1 0.9 1.3 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0
2015 0.7 0.4 0.4 0.7 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4
2016 0.4 0.1 – 0.1 0.6 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1
2017 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.6 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7
2018 0.7 0.6 0.4 0.6 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 1.0 2.5
2019 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.3 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 0.1 0.3 2.5
2020 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.5 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.0 0.1 1.7
2021 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.3 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.1 0.2 0.9
2022 1.6 1.3 1.2 1.9 1.5 1.2 1.1 1.1 1.9 1.9 3.3
2023 2.9 2.6 2.5 3.4 2.9 2.6 2.5 2.4 3.3 3.2 4.2
2023 May 2.80 2.41 2.41 3.16 2.82 2.50 2.37 2.34 3.26 3.11 4.17
June 2.89 2.55 2.55 3.31 2.88 2.58 2.46 2.38 3.32 3.12 4.24
July 2.98 2.61 2.61 3.64 2.97 2.67 2.55 2.46 3.43 3.24 4.25
Aug. 2.92 2.58 2.58 3.42 3.01 2.71 2.60 2.55 3.44 3.31 4.27
Sep. 3.18 2.75 2.75 3.57 3.11 2.82 2.71 2.66 3.51 3.42 4.39
Oct. 3.18 2.86 2.86 3.66 3.25 2.96 2.84 2.82 3.66 3.63 4.56
Nov. 3.01 2.61 2.61 3.53 3.02 2.75 2.64 2.60 3.40 3.37 4.23
Dec. 3.01 2.44 2.44 3.67 2.52 2.26 2.15 2.10 2.91 2.92 3.63
2024 Jan. 2.81 2.44 2.44 2.87 2.57 2.32 2.22 2.17 2.94 2.97 3.67
Feb. 2.71 2.47 2.47 3.05 2.72 2.48 2.39 2.33 3.09 3.10 3.74
Mar. 2.94 2.56 2.56 3.10 2.73 2.49 2.41 2.35 3.07 3.02 3.73
Apr. 3.05 2.61 2.61 3.12 2.81 2.58 2.50 2.45 3.15 3.14 3.74
1 Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of
over 4 years. Structured debt securities, debt securities with unscheduled redemption,
zero coupon bonds, floating rate notes and bonds not denominated in Euro are not
included. Group yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the
amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figuresare calculated on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual
figures are the unweighted means of the monthly figures. Adjustment of the scope of
securities included on 1 May 2020.  2 Only debt securities eligible as underlying
instruments for futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages.
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds  1 (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the
general publicCredit institutions
including building
and loan associations  2 Other sectors  3
of which:
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases Total TotalMoney
market
fundsSecur-
ities-
based
fundsReal
estate
fundsSpecial-
ised
fundsForeign
funds  4 Total Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
shares Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
sharesNon-resi-
dents  5
2012 111,236 89,942 2,084 –1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 –3,062 –1,562 117,738 22,855 –3,437
2013 123,736 91,337 9,184 – 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,710
2014 137,294 97,711 3,998 – 473 862 1,000 93,713 39,583 141,134 819 –1,745 140,315 41,328 –3,841
2015 189,802 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 43,665 181,932 7,362 494 174,570 43,171 7,870
2016 149,288 119,369 21,301 – 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 29,919 156,236 2,877 –3,172 153,359 33,091 –6,948
2017 148,214 94,921 29,560 – 235 21,970 4,406 65,361 53,292 150,740 4,938 1,048 145,802 52,244 –2,526
2018 108,293 103,694 15,279 377 4,166 6,168 88,415 4,599 114,973 2,979 –2,306 111,994 6,905 –6,680
2019 171,666 122,546 17,032 – 447 5,097 10,580 105,514 49,120 176,210 2,719 – 812 173,491 49,932 –4,544
2020 157,349 116,028 19,193 – 42 11,343 8,795 96,835 41,321 156,421 336 –1,656 156,085 42,977 928
2021 280,746 157,861 41,016 482 31,023 7,841 116,845 122,885 289,169 13,154 254 276,015 122,631 –8,423
2022 108,741 79,022 6,057 482 444 5,071 72,991 29,718 111,948 3,170 –1,459 108,778 31,177 –3,207
2023 67,941 44,484 5,969 460 4,951 723 38,461 23,457 69,924 –4,778 –2,054 74,702 25,511 –1,984
2023 May 8,770 6,261 1,228 – 144 1,301 21 5,035 2,508 8,493 – 49 42 8,542 2,466 277
June –1,322 –2,213 – 312 – 31 – 628 271 –1,901 891 41 85 – 19 – 44 910 –1,363
July 10,274 6,405 433 280 69 90 5,972 3,870 11,200 – 437 – 167 11,637 4,037 – 926
Aug. 4,460 4,731 13 115 – 107 – 40 4,720 – 271 4,311 132 – 129 4,179 – 142 149
Sep. 4,757 2,115 702 61 785 – 115 1,411 2,641 5,562 362 106 5,200 2,535 – 805
Oct. –2,603 –2,394 –1,269 – 130 – 843 – 139 –1,186 – 209 –2,712 814 – 113 –3,526 – 96 108
Nov. 219 –3,273 592 93 807 – 276 –3,865 3,493 1,322 95 – 288 1,227 3,781 –1,102
Dec. 10,428 10,971 –1,536 156 –1,448 – 182 12,506 – 543 9,666 – 11 13 9,677 – 556 762
2024 Jan. 23,814 10,382 – 457 141 – 406 – 19 10,839 13,431 24,111 1,999 196 22,112 13,235 – 298
Feb. 1,751 –1,458 –1,095 23 – 688 – 430 – 363 3,209 2,272 60 162 2,212 3,047 – 521
Mar. 2,573 –2,329 –1,070 188 – 610 – 455 –1,259 4,902 2,221 358 – 426 1,863 5,328 352
Apr. 15,113 10,159 742 220 1,063 – 481 9,417 4,953 14,172 442 226 13,730 4,727 941
1 Including public limited investment companies.  2 Book values.  3 Residual.  4 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values.  5 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of domestic fund shares by non-residents; transaction values.— The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
54•
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2022 2023
 Item 2021 2022 2023 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 45.36 67.77 –0.75 53.42 23.78 –22.94 –12.62 24.29 10.52
   Debt securities 2.81 4.10 6.63 3.52 0.05 4.49 1.79 1.58 –1.22
     Short-term debt securities 2.29 1.23 1.80 3.00 –0.22 2.00 1.08 –0.05 –1.22
     Long-term debt securities 0.52 2.87 4.82 0.52 0.26 2.49 0.71 1.62 –0.00
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 1.31 3.40 6.68 1.65 0.43 3.81 2.76 0.42 –0.31
         Non-financial corporations 0.72 0.86 –0.03 0.74 0.13 0.76 –0.34 –0.48 0.03
         Financial corporations 1.08 1.79 3.20 0.66 –0.04 1.43 1.44 0.28 0.06
         General government –0.48 0.74 3.51 0.25 0.34 1.63 1.66 0.62 –0.40
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 1.50 0.70 –0.05 1.88 –0.38 0.68 –0.98 1.15 –0.91
   Loans 68.48 44.78 87.01 31.65 –10.27 31.92 9.56 19.29 26.24
     Short-term loans 47.34 24.94 69.68 27.54 –18.66 23.26 8.20 16.65 21.57
     Long-term loans 21.14 19.84 17.33 4.11 8.38 8.66 1.36 2.65 4.67
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 11.08 25.74 83.58 15.23 –2.03 37.30 9.87 17.84 18.57
         Non-financial corporations 7.11 23.94 71.35 8.47 7.51 29.88 7.51 14.72 19.24
         Financial corporations 3.33 1.46 11.89 6.67 –9.63 7.34 2.27 3.04 –0.75
         General government 0.64 0.34 0.34 0.09 0.09 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.08
       Loans to the rest of the world 57.40 19.04 3.43 16.42 –8.24 –5.38 –0.31 1.45 7.67
   Equity and investment fund shares 145.48 104.10 39.18 2.51 24.33 –12.73 27.78 8.65 15.48
     Equity 123.72 104.05 33.66 4.75 22.34 –13.45 26.03 7.56 13.52
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 15.33 44.06 –14.32 34.33 –3.71 –10.51 –0.27 4.72 –8.26
         Non-financial corporations 16.89 43.79 –13.91 34.91 –3.82 –10.45 –0.32 5.06 –8.21
         Financial corporations –1.56 0.27 –0.41 –0.58 0.11 –0.07 0.05 –0.34 –0.05
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 8.32 2.56 –25.41 –0.54 2.99 –20.50 0.31 –9.39 4.17
       Other equity  1 100.07 57.43 73.40 –29.04 23.05 17.57 25.99 12.24 17.61
     Investment fund shares 21.77 0.05 5.52 –2.24 1.99 0.72 1.75 1.09 1.96
       Money market fund shares 0.66 –0.38 –0.58 –1.12 2.37 –0.80 –0.41 0.59 0.04
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 21.11 0.43 6.10 –1.12 –0.38 1.52 2.15 0.50 1.92
   Insurance technical reserves 19.52 1.49 5.15 –1.06 –1.29 7.13 –0.16 –0.26 –1.56
   Financial derivatives 15.54 28.93 –1.08 10.11 –30.76 3.95 0.70 14.01 –19.73
   Other accounts receivable 63.29 18.75 71.28 –59.81 130.89 84.17 –12.44 –56.60 56.15
   Total 360.47 269.92 207.41 40.34 136.72 95.99 14.60 10.95 85.87
 External financing
   Debt securities 20.86 14.16 0.35 1.37 –1.93 1.38 2.44 1.57 –5.04
     Short-term securities 2.51 –0.36 –4.68 –2.73 –2.69 –0.16 –0.70 –0.84 –2.99
       Long-term securities 18.35 14.52 5.03 4.10 0.76 1.54 3.14 2.41 –2.05
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 9.11 5.85 0.73 0.19 –1.61 1.73 0.52 0.56 –2.07
           Non-financial corporations 0.72 0.86 –0.03 0.74 0.13 0.76 –0.34 –0.48 0.03
           Financial corporations 9.09 4.46 –2.75 –0.75 –1.99 0.40 –0.26 –0.08 –2.80
           General government 0.09 –0.07 –0.11 0.01 0.01 0.00 –0.07 –0.04 –0.00
           Households –0.79 0.60 3.61 0.19 0.24 0.57 1.18 1.16 0.70
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 11.75 8.31 –0.38 1.18 –0.32 –0.35 1.92 1.01 –2.97
   Loans 139.34 175.53 48.24 76.74 29.79 14.68 23.10 5.48 4.98
     Short-term loans 77.99 73.18 22.58 45.53 –16.64 7.16 13.36 2.82 –0.76
     Long-term loans 61.35 102.35 25.66 31.21 46.43 7.52 9.74 2.66 5.73
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 77.19 154.24 82.45 69.53 16.41 49.29 18.38 10.98 3.80
         Non-financial corporations 7.11 23.94 71.35 8.47 7.51 29.88 7.51 14.72 19.24
         Financial corporations 56.92 109.19 31.80 34.40 19.18 27.06 15.51 1.41 –12.19
         General government 13.16 21.10 –20.70 26.66 –10.28 –7.65 –4.65 –5.15 –3.24
       Loans from the rest of the world 62.15 21.29 –34.21 7.21 13.38 –34.61 4.72 –5.50 1.18
   Equity 61.44 16.98 10.93 3.48 1.41 –4.77 7.18 1.78 6.74
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 26.44 57.01 –26.83 33.32 0.59 –13.75 –5.07 2.62 –10.62
       Non-financial corporations 16.89 43.79 –13.91 34.91 –3.82 –10.45 –0.32 5.06 –8.21
       Financial corporations –2.39 2.17 –7.46 –4.47 2.89 –0.67 –4.55 –1.07 –1.18
       General government –0.09 0.76 –1.12 0.25 0.10 –0.88 –0.21 –0.04 0.01
       Households 12.04 10.29 –4.33 2.63 1.42 –1.75 0.00 –1.33 –1.25
     Listed shares of the rest of the world 18.88 –9.47 20.76 8.05 –2.62 1.99 7.37 0.89 10.51
     Other equity  1 16.11 –30.55 16.99 –37.89 3.43 6.98 4.88 –1.73 6.86
   Insurance technical reserves 4.26 3.53 3.53 0.88 0.89 0.88 0.88 0.88 0.89
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 14.32 –14.10 10.22 1.80 –13.34 1.58 2.08 2.72 3.85
   Other accounts payable 139.60 64.69 60.16 17.62 20.47 11.12 3.37 3.83 41.83
   Total 379.82 260.79 133.43 101.89 37.28 24.86 39.05 16.27 53.25
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
55•
IX. Financial accounts
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2022 2023
 Item 2021 2022 2023 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 726.6 794.5 710.5 771.8 794.5 746.4 654.8 732.5 710.5
   Debt securities 54.3 53.8 62.0 53.7 53.8 58.9 60.4 62.0 62.0
     Short-term debt securities 7.1 8.4 10.1 8.6 8.4 10.4 11.3 11.3 10.1
     Long-term debt securities 47.2 45.5 51.9 45.0 45.5 48.5 49.1 50.7 51.9
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 23.3 24.7 32.2 24.1 24.7 28.7 31.4 31.8 32.2
         Non-financial corporations 5.3 5.8 5.8 5.5 5.8 6.5 6.2 5.7 5.8
         Financial corporations 14.5 15.0 18.8 14.9 15.0 16.6 18.0 18.3 18.8
         General government 3.5 3.9 7.6 3.6 3.9 5.6 7.2 7.8 7.6
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 31.0 29.2 29.8 29.6 29.2 30.2 29.0 30.2 29.8
   Loans 789.2 837.7 922.7 853.8 837.7 868.4 877.3 897.9 922.7
     Short-term loans 612.9 640.1 708.2 662.9 640.1 662.4 669.9 687.5 708.2
     Long-term loans 176.3 197.5 214.5 190.9 197.5 206.0 207.4 210.4 214.5
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 426.1 451.8 535.4 453.8 451.8 489.1 499.0 516.8 535.4
         Non-financial corporations 334.7 358.7 430.0 351.1 358.7 388.5 396.0 410.8 430.0
         Financial corporations 82.8 84.2 96.1 93.8 84.2 91.6 93.8 96.9 96.1
         General government 8.6 8.9 9.3 8.8 8.9 9.0 9.1 9.2 9.3
       Loans to the rest of the world 363.2 385.9 387.3 400.0 385.9 379.3 378.3 381.1 387.3
   Equity and investment fund shares 2,852.2 2,607.8 2,666.7 2,663.0 2,607.8 2,681.2 2,704.1 2,643.9 2,666.7
     Equity 2,612.0 2,395.2 2,429.8 2,451.1 2,395.2 2,462.5 2,478.7 2,418.3 2,429.8
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 393.0 331.8 334.5 307.5 331.8 361.1 354.8 330.1 334.5
         Non-financial corporations 384.9 324.5 326.9 301.7 324.5 353.9 347.0 322.9 326.9
         Financial corporations 8.0 7.4 7.7 5.7 7.4 7.2 7.8 7.2 7.7
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 74.7 69.8 48.0 65.2 69.8 51.6 51.4 41.5 48.0
       Other equity  1 2,144.3 1,993.6 2,047.3 2,078.4 1,993.6 2,049.9 2,072.4 2,046.7 2,047.3
     Investment fund shares 240.2 212.6 236.9 211.9 212.6 218.6 225.4 225.6 236.9
       Money market fund shares 7.6 7.2 6.9 4.9 7.2 6.5 6.1 6.8 6.9
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 232.6 205.4 230.1 207.0 205.4 212.1 219.3 218.8 230.1
   Insurance technical reserves 64.8 41.0 44.4 42.9 41.0 47.3 46.4 45.5 44.4
   Financial derivatives 105.9 92.2 33.2 199.0 92.2 65.1 56.9 44.7 33.2
   Other accounts receivable 1,454.4 1,518.3 1,638.9 1,527.6 1,518.3 1,572.8 1,568.7 1,597.5 1,638.9
   Total 6,047.4 5,945.4 6,078.4 6,111.7 5,945.4 6,040.0 5,968.6 6,024.0 6,078.4
 Liabilities
   Debt securities 252.3 228.7 239.7 226.7 228.7 231.2 234.8 234.8 239.7
     Short-term securities 9.6 9.3 4.5 12.0 9.3 9.1 8.4 7.5 4.5
     Long-term securities 242.7 219.4 235.2 214.7 219.4 222.1 226.4 227.3 235.2
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 100.6 90.9 95.8 90.3 90.9 93.5 94.0 93.5 95.8
         Non-financial corporations 5.3 5.8 5.8 5.5 5.8 6.5 6.2 5.7 5.8
         Financial corporations 83.2 73.4 74.2 73.8 73.4 74.4 74.3 73.3 74.2
         General government 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.2
         Households 11.8 11.4 15.5 10.7 11.4 12.2 13.3 14.3 15.5
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 151.7 137.8 143.9 136.4 137.8 137.7 140.8 141.3 143.9
   Loans 2,415.3 2,598.6 2,640.9 2,578.8 2,598.6 2,607.9 2,630.1 2,639.6 2,640.9
     Short-term loans 904.0 981.3 999.6 1,004.6 981.3 986.5 999.5 1,003.8 999.6
     Long-term loans 1,511.3 1,617.3 1,641.2 1,574.2 1,617.3 1,621.4 1,630.6 1,635.8 1,641.2
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 1,470.2 1,624.8 1,705.3 1,607.8 1,624.8 1,671.0 1,689.0 1,701.6 1,705.3
         Non-financial corporations 334.7 358.7 430.0 351.1 358.7 388.5 396.0 410.8 430.0
         Financial corporations 1,020.7 1,130.5 1,160.5 1,110.9 1,130.5 1,154.2 1,169.5 1,173.1 1,160.5
         General government 114.7 135.7 114.9 145.8 135.7 128.2 123.4 117.8 114.9
       Loans from the rest of the world 945.1 973.8 935.5 971.0 973.8 936.9 941.1 938.0 935.5
   Equity 3,689.0 2,983.3 3,190.3 2,843.1 2,983.3 3,267.6 3,266.2 3,104.2 3,190.3
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 924.8 761.4 791.2 691.4 761.4 855.9 821.8 762.7 791.2
       Non-financial corporations 384.9 324.5 326.9 301.7 324.5 353.9 347.0 322.9 326.9
       Financial corporations 210.3 151.2 156.5 138.1 151.2 182.3 165.2 152.0 156.5
       General government 69.9 69.2 76.0 61.4 69.2 78.9 75.3 70.9 76.0
       Households 259.7 216.4 231.7 190.2 216.4 240.9 234.3 216.8 231.7
     Listed shares of the rest of the world 1,126.3 823.1 967.6 732.0 823.1 941.1 976.0 926.2 967.6
     Other equity  1 1,637.9 1,398.8 1,431.6 1,419.7 1,398.8 1,470.6 1,468.5 1,415.3 1,431.6
   Insurance technical reserves 287.4 290.9 294.5 290.0 290.9 291.8 292.7 293.6 294.5
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 137.4 73.3 30.0 168.5 73.3 44.7 39.5 15.0 30.0
   Other accounts payable 1,526.5 1,601.3 1,688.3 1,650.8 1,601.3 1,599.8 1,616.7 1,683.3 1,688.3
   Total 8,307.9 7,776.0 8,083.7 7,757.9 7,776.0 8,043.0 8,080.0 7,970.5 8,083.7
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
56•
IX. Financial accounts
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2022 2023
 Item 2021 2022 2023 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 146.19 110.56 86.49 32.44 41.09 –9.09 25.60 13.42 56.56
     Currency 60.58 44.38 15.78 13.55 6.13 4.50 3.52 2.42 5.33
     Deposits 85.61 66.18 70.71 18.89 34.96 –13.59 22.08 11.00 51.23
       Transferable deposits 90.84 47.63 –129.98 20.48 4.41 –60.51 –18.16 –32.67 –18.65
       Time deposits –5.09 34.49 178.94 5.74 33.49 50.43 43.22 42.53 42.76
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) –0.13 –15.94 21.75 –7.32 –2.95 –3.52 –2.99 1.14 27.12
   Debt securities –5.89 25.03 65.93 5.36 11.96 29.74 20.45 14.35 1.39
     Short-term debt securities 0.31 2.01 15.01 0.17 1.79 7.99 6.12 3.68 –2.78
     Long-term debt securities –6.20 23.02 50.92 5.18 10.17 21.74 14.33 10.67 4.17
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors –3.70 20.32 54.12 3.76 10.52 25.57 16.76 11.98 –0.19
         Non-financial corporations –0.83 0.50 3.42 0.21 0.23 0.52 1.11 1.09 0.69
         Financial corporations –2.57 17.47 42.82 2.94 9.01 21.52 12.75 9.32 –0.77
         General government –0.30 2.35 7.88 0.61 1.29 3.52 2.90 1.57 –0.10
       Debt securities of the rest of the world –2.19 4.72 11.80 1.60 1.44 4.17 3.70 2.37 1.57
   Equity and investment fund shares 136.69 78.09 36.61 9.21 15.59 12.05 10.72 7.90 5.95
     Equity 31.80 26.89 0.24 3.98 4.97 0.11 0.36 0.79 –1.02
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 14.29 12.38 –4.65 3.36 0.70 –0.91 0.01 –1.44 –2.31
         Non-financial corporations 12.71 9.96 –3.60 2.68 1.36 –2.03 0.09 –0.41 –1.25
         Financial corporations 1.58 2.42 –1.05 0.67 –0.66 1.12 –0.08 –1.03 –1.06
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 10.83 8.55 2.89 –0.45 3.04 0.44 –0.21 1.74 0.92
       Other equity  1 6.69 5.96 1.99 1.07 1.23 0.57 0.56 0.50 0.37
     Investment fund shares 104.88 51.19 36.37 5.23 10.62 11.94 10.36 7.11 6.97
       Money market fund shares 0.19 0.82 4.42 0.12 0.44 0.43 1.47 1.67 0.85
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 104.70 50.37 31.95 5.11 10.18 11.50 8.89 5.44 6.12
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 20.31 –0.46 3.12 –1.30 –1.81 6.45 –0.72 –0.71 –1.90
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 51.74 31.34 –8.82 12.03 7.30 1.31 0.62 –3.34 –7.41
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 27.32 48.64 42.63 8.63 11.96 14.13 5.01 12.37 11.12
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts receivable  2 –0.35 –0.28 31.66 1.56 –19.49 17.70 –0.94 14.90 0.01
   Total 376.00 292.91 257.61 67.93 66.60 72.28 60.74 58.88 65.72
 External financing
   Loans 98.17 83.67 15.70 25.87 9.50 2.65 5.82 6.31 0.93
     Short-term loans 0.86 2.59 –0.90 0.74 0.10 0.74 –0.28 –0.49 –0.86
     Long-term loans 97.31 81.08 16.60 25.14 9.40 1.91 6.10 6.81 1.78
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 99.89 79.69 20.15 23.30 10.53 2.89 6.05 6.43 4.78
       Consumer loans –0.89 4.60 1.44 2.59 0.87 0.54 1.26 1.66 –2.02
       Entrepreneurial loans –0.83 –0.61 –5.89 –0.01 –1.90 –0.78 –1.49 –1.78 –1.84
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 94.32 82.56 12.26 24.46 9.45 1.80 4.69 6.41 –0.64
       Loans from financial corporations other than MFIs 3.85 1.11 3.44 1.41 0.05 0.85 1.13 –0.10 1.57
       Loans from general government and rest of the world –0.00 –0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts payable 0.90 2.98 1.71 1.19 1.93 –0.55 –0.39 0.46 2.19
   Total 99.07 86.65 17.41 27.06 11.43 2.10 5.43 6.77 3.11
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
57•
IX. Financial accounts
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2022 2023
 Item 2021 2022 2023 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 3,005.6 3,118.2 3,213.9 3,082.4 3,118.2 3,107.9 3,133.6 3,148.8 3,213.9
     Currency 385.1 429.5 445.3 423.4 429.5 434.0 437.5 439.9 445.3
     Deposits 2,620.5 2,688.7 2,768.6 2,659.0 2,688.7 2,674.0 2,696.1 2,708.8 2,768.6
       Transferable deposits 1,764.4 1,811.7 1,686.3 1,807.3 1,811.7 1,756.0 1,737.7 1,705.0 1,686.3
       Time deposits 297.3 334.8 523.2 306.5 334.8 384.2 427.6 471.9 523.2
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) 558.8 542.3 559.1 545.3 542.3 533.8 530.8 531.9 559.1
     Debt securities 109.6 125.0 198.9 110.4 125.0 157.1 177.8 192.4 198.9
       Short-term debt securities 1.8 3.9 19.2 1.9 3.9 11.9 18.1 21.9 19.2
       Long-term debt securities 107.8 121.1 179.7 108.4 121.1 145.2 159.7 170.5 179.7
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 75.3 88.4 147.8 76.1 88.4 116.1 133.1 144.6 147.8
           Non-financial corporations 9.8 9.7 13.5 8.9 9.7 10.4 11.4 12.4 13.5
           Financial corporations 63.2 74.5 122.0 64.1 74.5 98.0 111.0 120.0 122.0
           General government 2.2 4.2 12.3 3.0 4.2 7.8 10.7 12.2 12.3
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 34.3 36.6 51.1 34.3 36.6 41.0 44.7 47.8 51.1
   Equity and investment fund shares 1,900.6 1,725.3 1,929.4 1,661.2 1,725.3 1,824.8 1,866.3 1,837.0 1,929.4
     Equity 967.8 869.3 966.4 828.2 869.3 931.7 943.4 921.7 966.4
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 296.0 255.9 279.2 223.2 255.9 282.1 277.3 262.5 279.2
         Non-financial corporations 250.4 208.7 224.0 183.3 208.7 232.3 225.9 209.5 224.0
         Financial corporations 45.6 47.2 55.3 39.9 47.2 49.9 51.4 53.0 55.3
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 249.2 209.3 247.9 210.2 209.3 227.3 239.6 235.8 247.9
       Other equity  1 422.6 404.1 439.3 394.8 404.1 422.2 426.6 423.5 439.3
     Investment fund shares 932.7 856.0 963.0 833.0 856.0 893.1 922.9 915.3 963.0
       Money market fund shares 2.5 3.3 7.8 2.9 3.3 3.7 5.2 7.0 7.8
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 930.2 852.7 955.1 830.1 852.7 889.4 917.7 908.3 955.1
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 432.5 41.3 44.7 44.0 41.3 47.6 46.7 45.8 44.7
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 1,162.2 1,087.1 1,157.1 1,096.9 1,087.1 1,112.5 1,119.5 1,086.6 1,157.1
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 986.1 1,117.7 1,143.9 1,109.9 1,117.7 1,127.9 1,130.6 1,128.6 1,143.9
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts receivable  2 27.5 26.5 27.6 27.5 26.5 27.0 27.7 26.9 27.6
   Total 7,624.0 7,241.1 7,715.5 7,132.2 7,241.1 7,404.8 7,502.3 7,466.0 7,715.5
 Liabilities
   Loans 2,024.3 2,111.8 2,129.9 2,102.7 2,111.8 2,114.5 2,120.2 2,127.1 2,129.9
     Short-term loans 53.0 55.5 55.1 55.8 55.5 56.6 56.4 55.9 55.1
     Long-term loans 1,971.3 2,056.3 2,074.8 2,047.0 2,056.3 2,057.9 2,063.8 2,071.2 2,074.8
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 1,549.3 1,632.3 1,655.7 1,621.3 1,632.3 1,636.2 1,642.1 1,649.1 1,655.7
       Consumer loans 224.5 228.9 230.0 228.1 228.9 229.7 230.8 232.1 230.0
       Entrepreneurial loans 250.5 250.6 244.2 253.4 250.6 248.6 247.3 245.9 244.2
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,920.3 2,004.0 2,016.3 1,995.3 2,004.0 2,005.8 2,010.5 2,016.9 2,016.3
       Loans from financial corporations other than MFIs 104.0 107.8 113.7 107.4 107.8 108.8 109.7 110.2 113.7
       Loans from general government and rest of the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts payable 20.3 23.4 25.3 21.5 23.4 22.9 22.6 23.0 25.3
   Total 2,044.6 2,135.2 2,155.2 2,124.2 2,135.2 2,137.5 2,142.7 2,150.1 2,155.2
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
58•
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
General
governmentCentral
governmentState
governmentLocal
governmentSocial
security
fundsGeneral
governmentCentral
governmentState
governmentLocal
governmentSocial
security
funds
Period € billion As a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus 1
2017 +43.7 + 7.9 +13.9 +10.7 +11.1 +1.3 +0.2 +0.4 +0.3 +0.3
2018 +65.6 +21.0 +12.0 +16.7 +16.0 +1.9 +0.6 +0.4 +0.5 +0.5
2019 +53.0 +21.5 +14.0 +8.4 +9.1 +1.5 +0.6 +0.4 +0.2 +0.3
p 2020 –147.7 –87.1 –32.6 +6.9 –34.8 –4.3 –2.6 –1.0 +0.2 –1.0
p 2021 –129.7 –144.2 +5.6 +6.2 +2.6 –3.6 –4.0 +0.2 +0.2 +0.1
p 2022 –96.9 –124.3 +14.4 +4.7 +8.3 –2.5 –3.2 +0.4 +0.1 +0.2
pe 2023 –99.1 –90.5 –5.3 –12.1 +8.8 –2.4 –2.2 –0.1 –0.3 +0.2
p 2022 H1 – 4.6 –36.2 +18.2 +5.8 +7.7 –0.2 –1.9 +1.0 +0.3 +0.4
pH2 –92.3 –88.0 –3.8 –1.1 +0.6 –4.7 –4.4 –0.2 –0.1 +0.0
pe 2023 H1 –37.9 –43.3 –2.2 –2.9 +10.4 –1.9 –2.1 –0.1 –0.1 +0.5
peH2 –61.2 –47.2 –3.0 –9.2 –1.7 –2.9 –2.2 –0.1 –0.4 –0.1
Debt level 2 End of year or quarter
2017 2,130.3 1,361.5 616.8 168.3 0.8 65.2 41.7 18.9 5.2 0.0
2018 2,083.7 1,334.5 603.2 162.2 0.7 61.9 39.7 17.9 4.8 0.0
2019 2,069.9 1,312.3 612.7 161.4 0.9 59.6 37.8 17.6 4.6 0.0
p 2020 2,340.8 1,526.5 664.4 163.2 7.6 68.8 44.8 19.5 4.8 0.2
p 2021 2,495.5 1,679.3 665.3 165.3 0.6 69.0 46.4 18.4 4.6 0.0
p 2022 2,561.7 1,776.0 634.2 172.2 2.8 66.1 45.8 16.4 4.4 0.1
p 2023 2,622.7 1,850.1 623.1 177.7 2.6 63.6 44.9 15.1 4.3 0.1
p 2022 Q1 2,499.1 1,684.3 663.4 164.9 3.4 67.6 45.6 17.9 4.5 0.1
pQ2 2,537.4 1,723.4 660.2 166.8 3.7 67.4 45.8 17.5 4.4 0.1
pQ3 2,551.3 1,757.0 643.8 166.6 4.2 66.8 46.0 16.9 4.4 0.1
pQ4 2,561.7 1,776.0 634.2 172.2 2.8 66.1 45.8 16.4 4.4 0.1
p 2023 Q1 2,587.2 1,798.7 632.0 173.0 3.5 65.6 45.6 16.0 4.4 0.1
pQ2 2,586.5 1,806.1 624.2 172.8 2.7 64.6 45.1 15.6 4.3 0.1
pQ3 2,627.2 1,848.6 621.6 175.5 3.8 64.6 45.5 15.3 4.3 0.1
pQ4 2,622.7 1,850.1 623.1 177.7 2.6 63.6 44.9 15.1 4.3 0.1
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations.  1 The deficit/surplus in
accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition.  2 Quarterly GDP
ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding quarters.
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts *
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Period Total TaxesSocial con-
tributions Other TotalSocial
benefitsCompen-
sation of
employeesInter-
mediate
consumptionGross
capital
formation Interest OtherDeficit/
surplusMemo item:
Total tax
burden  1
€ billion
2017 1,486.9 773.3 549.5 164.2 1,443.3 784.8 250.6 169.5 71.6 33.8 132.9 +43.7 1,329.5
2018 1,557.2 808.1 572.6 176.6 1,491.6 805.6 260.3 176.4 78.5 31.2 139.7 +65.6 1,387.7
2019 1,616.5 834.7 598.2 183.6 1,563.4 846.2 273.6 187.4 84.2 27.4 144.5 +53.0 1,440.0
p 2020 1,569.9 781.7 608.1 180.1 1,717.6 904.5 285.2 211.3 92.9 21.7 201.9 –147.7 1,396.7
p 2021 1,712.9 889.0 632.1 191.8 1,842.6 941.1 295.4 226.6 92.5 21.1 266.0 –129.7 1,528.7
p 2022 1,821.2 955.9 666.8 198.6 1,918.1 974.0 307.9 238.4 100.9 26.5 270.4 –96.9 1,633.4
pe 2023 1,908.0 967.8 709.4 230.8 2,007.1 1,022.8 328.0 259.0 106.7 36.2 254.4 –99.1 1,685.6
As a percentage of GDP
2017 45.5 23.7 16.8 5.0 44.2 24.0 7.7 5.2 2.2 1.0 4.1 +1.3 40.7
2018 46.3 24.0 17.0 5.2 44.3 23.9 7.7 5.2 2.3 0.9 4.1 +1.9 41.2
2019 46.5 24.0 17.2 5.3 45.0 24.4 7.9 5.4 2.4 0.8 4.2 +1.5 41.4
p 2020 46.1 23.0 17.9 5.3 50.5 26.6 8.4 6.2 2.7 0.6 5.9 –4.3 41.0
p 2021 47.3 24.6 17.5 5.3 50.9 26.0 8.2 6.3 2.6 0.6 7.4 –3.6 42.3
p 2022 47.0 24.7 17.2 5.1 49.5 25.1 7.9 6.1 2.6 0.7 7.0 –2.5 42.1
pe 2023 46.3 23.5 17.2 5.6 48.7 24.8 8.0 6.3 2.6 0.9 6.2 –2.4 40.9
Percentage growth rates
2017 +4.2 +4.6 +4.8 +0.5 +3.8 +4.0 +4.1 +4.3 +5.1 –9.3 +4.5 . +4.7
2018 +4.7 +4.5 +4.2 +7.6 +3.3 +2.6 +3.9 +4.1 +9.7 –7.8 +5.1 . +4.4
2019 +3.8 +3.3 +4.5 +4.0 +4.8 +5.1 +5.1 +6.2 +7.2 –12.0 +3.5 . +3.8
p 2020 –2.9 –6.3 +1.6 –1.9 +9.9 +6.9 +4.2 +12.7 +10.4 –20.8 +39.7 . –3.0
p 2021 +9.1 +13.7 +3.9 +6.5 +7.3 +4.1 +3.6 +7.2 –0.5 –3.1 +31.7 . +9.4
p 2022 +6.3 +7.5 +5.5 +3.6 +4.1 +3.5 +4.3 +5.2 +9.0 +25.8 +1.7 . +6.9
pe 2023 +4.8 +1.2 +6.4 +16.2 +4.6 +5.0 +6.5 +8.7 +5.7 +36.6 –5.9 . +3.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office.  * Figures in accordance with ESA 2010.  1 Taxes and
social contributions plus customs duties and bank levies to the Single Resolution Fund.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
59•
X. Public finances in Germany
3. General government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:  3
Period Total  4 TaxesFinan-
cial
transac-
tions  5 Total  4Person-
nel
expend-
itureCurrent
grants InterestFixed
asset
forma-
tionFinan-
cial
transac-
tions  5Deficit/
surplusRev-
enue  6Expend-
itureDeficit/
surplusRev-
enueExpend-
itureDeficit/
surplus
2017 897.6 734.5 7.7 867.8 261.5 327.2 41.9 51.7 13.8 +29.8 631.5 622.0 +9.5 1,414.9 1,375.6 +39.3
2018 949.2 776.3 6.0 904.0 272.4 337.3 39.1 55.1 16.1 +45.2 656.2 642.5 +13.6 1,488.1 1,429.3 +58.8
2019 1,007.7 799.4 11.0 973.9 285.9 348.9 33.5 62.2 16.8 +33.7 685.0 676.7 +8.3 1,571.2 1,529.2 +42.0
2020 944.3 739.9 13.7 1,109.7 299.4 422.0 25.8 68.6 59.9 –165.4 719.5 747.8 –28.3 1,516.2 1,709.9 –193.7
2021 1,105.4 833.3 25.3 1,239.9 310.7 530.8 21.0 69.3 26.1 –134.5 769.2 777.1 –7.9 1,701.6 1,844.0 –142.4
P 2022 1,145.2 895.9 32.4 1,287.0 325.7 499.6 33.5 72.5 79.3 –141.8 800.5 793.3 +7.2 1,772.9 1,907.5 –134.6
P 2023 1,220.1 915.9 36.4 1,319.5 348.9 480.4 64.4 83.2 31.8 –99.4 819.9 814.5 +5.4 1,899.5 1,993.5 –94.0
2021 Q1 240.7 185.3 4.3 300.6 75.5 130.8 7.3 11.1 14.6 –59.9 P182.4 P196.3 P–13.9 P385.2 P458.9 P–73.8
Q2 267.0 195.8 7.5 297.1 74.8 122.7 10.7 15.2 10.5 –30.2 P185.9 P197.0 P–11.1 P414.1 P455.3 P–41.2
Q3 270.9 210.7 7.4 290.2 75.8 116.3 – 0.4 16.5 10.4 –19.3 P183.4 P191.9 P–8.6 P413.5 P441.4 P–27.8
Q4 332.9 237.7 6.1 347.8 84.1 153.4 3.1 26.4 – 9.4 –14.9 P197.3 P190.4 P+6.9 P492.6 P500.6 P–8.0
2022 Q1 278.2 224.0 5.0 279.3 79.6 116.8 5.5 11.9 7.0 – 1.0 P193.8 P199.8 P–6.0 P430.7 P437.8 P–7.1
Q2 287.9 224.6 5.1 294.2 77.8 126.4 10.6 15.3 5.9 – 6.2 P199.9 P196.7 P+3.2 P444.2 P447.2 P–3.1
Q3 267.7 207.0 13.3 298.8 78.1 116.8 10.8 17.7 10.8 –31.0 P194.0 P197.6 P–3.6 P419.2 P453.8 P–34.6
Q4 318.5 244.5 9.0 413.5 89.7 138.5 6.5 27.5 55.6 –95.0 P210.5 P198.1 P+12.4 P486.0 P568.5 P–82.5
2023 Q1 281.9 215.4 9.3 331.8 81.3 130.7 20.1 13.6 17.8 –49.9 P195.4 P200.8 P–5.4 P441.7 P497.0 P–55.3
Q2 311.6 226.3 9.4 313.4 84.7 118.0 24.2 17.8 2.2 – 1.8 P199.3 P198.9 P+0.4 P476.2 P477.6 P–1.4
Q3 290.5 229.6 7.2 303.1 86.5 103.2 12.6 21.0 4.5 –12.6 P201.5 P205.0 P–3.6 P457.1 P473.3 P–16.1
PQ4 342.3 244.6 10.6 373.8 96.0 126.3 11.4 30.6 7.3 –31.6 218.4 208.7 +9.7 525.5 547.4 –21.9
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data.  1 Annual fig-
ures based on the quarterly figures of the Federal Statistical Office, core budgets and
off-budget entities which are assigned to the general government sector.  2 The annual
figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all pro-
visional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are estimated.  3 The develop-
ment of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in part by statisticalchangeovers.  4 Including discrepancies in clearing transactions between central, state
and local government.  5 On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as dis-
posals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this con-
tains the acquisition of equity interests and loans granted.  6 Excluding central govern-
ment liquidity assistance to the Federal Employment Agency.
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus
2017 357.8 352.8 + 5.0 396.7 385.5 +11.3 258.5 247.7 +10.7
2018 374.4 363.5 +10.9 419.6 399.8 +19.9 270.0 260.1 + 9.8
2019 382.5 369.2 +13.3 436.3 419.3 +17.0 282.4 276.7 + 5.7
2020 341.4 472.1 –130.7 455.5 489.0 –33.6 295.2 293.2 + 2.0
2021 370.3 511.9 –141.6 509.3 508.7 + 0.5 308.0 303.4 + 4.6
2022 399.6 515.6 –116.0 534.8 522.5 +12.3 328.5 325.8 + 2.7
2023 425.3 490.2 –64.9 P 530.5 P 530.8 P– 0.2 358.2 365.0 – 6.8
2021 Q1 75.0 127.5 –52.5 113.7 120.7 – 7.1 61.1 69.7 – 8.6
Q2 86.4 123.5 –37.1 122.8 122.0 + 0.8 74.6 71.7 + 2.9
Q3 93.9 114.7 –20.7 125.9 120.2 + 5.7 74.6 74.9 – 0.3
Q4 115.1 146.3 –31.2 145.6 144.5 + 1.2 97.6 87.0 +10.6
2022 Q1 94.7 114.0 –19.3 134.6 122.7 +11.9 68.4 73.8 – 5.4
Q2 99.7 123.5 –23.7 133.2 123.6 + 9.6 81.0 77.3 + 3.7
Q3 89.0 127.8 –38.7 126.1 121.4 + 4.7 81.1 80.3 + 0.8
Q4 116.1 150.4 –34.2 139.6 153.4 –13.8 98.0 94.5 + 3.5
2023 Q1 96.2 116.9 –20.7 121.0 122.3 – 1.3 73.3 81.0 – 7.7
Q2 101.8 119.8 –18.0 138.5 133.6 + 4.9 87.0 86.6 + 0.4
Q3 106.1 115.9 – 9.8 123.1 120.0 + 3.2 87.4 91.5 – 4.1
Q4 121.2 137.6 –16.3 p 146.6 p 153.5 p– 6.9 110.4 105.8 + 4.6
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office data and Bundesbank
calculations.  1 Any amounts of the Bundesbank's profit distribution exceeding the
reference value that were used to repay parts of the debt of central government'sspecial funds are not included here.  2 Including the local authority level of the city
states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg.  3 Data of core budgets and off-budget entities
which are assigned to the general government sector.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
60•
X. Public finances in Germany
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Period Total TotalCentral
government  1State
government  1 European Union  2Local
government  3Balance of
untransferred
tax shares  4Memo item:
Amounts deducted
in the Federal
budget  5
2017 734,540 629,458 336,730 271,046 21,682 105,158 – 76 27,368
2018 776,314 665,005 349,134 287,282 28,589 111,308 + 1 26,775
2019 799,416 684,491 355,050 298,519 30,921 114,902 + 23 25,998
2020 739,911 632,268 313,381 286,065 32,822 107,916 – 274 30,266
2021 833,337 706,978 342,988 325,768 38,222 125,000 + 1,359 29,321
2022 895,854 760,321 372,121 349,583 38,617 134,146 + 1,387 34,911
2023 915,893 774,112 389,114 349,554 35,444 143,663 – 1,882 33,073
2022 Q1 224,006 189,158 92,112 87,240 9,806 24,772 + 10,077 7,261
Q2 224,538 190,982 94,153 86,852 9,977 34,149 – 594 11,576
Q3 205,544 174,232 84,078 80,020 10,133 33,618 – 2,306 7,953
Q4 241,767 205,950 101,778 95,471 8,702 41,607 – 5,790 8,121
2023 Q1 220,950 186,173 93,366 83,536 9,271 26,505 + 8,271 7,665
Q2 221,225 186,597 94,492 82,961 9,144 35,152 – 525 8,959
Q3 230,151 195,334 98,626 87,824 8,884 34,958 – 141 8,678
Q4 243,568 206,008 102,631 95,233 8,145 47,048 – 9,488 7,770
2024 Q1 ... 188,806 96,283 85,277 7,246 ... ... 7,999
2023 Apr. . 50,321 25,108 22,328 2,885 . . 2,486
2024 Apr. . 54,202 27,595 24,273 2,333 . . 2,769
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations.  1 Before deducting or adding supplementary central government transfers,
regionalisation funds (local public transport), compensation for the transfer of motor
vehicle tax to central government and consolidation assistance, which central govern-
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these amounts
which are deducted from tax revenue in the Federal budget.  2 Customs duties andshares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from central government
tax revenue.  3 Including local government taxes in the city states Berlin, Bremen and
Hamburg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms.  4 Difference between local
government's share in the joint taxes received by the state government cash offices in
the period in question (see Table X. 6) and the amounts passed on to local govern-
ment in the same period.  5 Volume of the positions mentioned under footnote 1.
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
€ million
Joint taxes
Income taxes  2 Value added taxes (VAT)  7
Period Total  1 TotalWage
tax 3Assessed
income
tax 4Corpora-
tion tax  5Invest-
ment
income
tax 6 TotalDomestic
VATImport
VATLocal
business
tax
trans-
fers  8Central
govern-
ment
taxes  9State
govern-
ment
taxes  9EU
customs
dutiesMemo
item:
Local
govern-
ment
share in
joint
taxes
2017 674,598 312,462 195,524 59,428 29,259 28,251 226,355 170,498 55,856 8,580 99,934 22,205 5,063 45,141
2018 713,576 332,141 208,231 60,415 33,425 30,069 234,800 175,437 59,363 9,078 108,586 23,913 5,057 48,571
2019 735,869 344,016 219,660 63,711 32,013 28,632 243,256 183,113 60,143 8,114 109,548 25,850 5,085 51,379
2020 682,376 320,798 209,286 58,982 24,268 28,261 219,484 168,700 50,784 3,954 105,632 27,775 4,734 50,107
2021 760,953 370,296 218,407 72,342 42,124 37,423 250,800 187,631 63,169 4,951 98,171 31,613 5,122 53,976
2022 814,886 390,111 227,205 77,411 46,334 39,161 284,850 198,201 86,649 6,347 96,652 30,097 6,829 54,565
2023 829,774 399,271 236,227 73,388 44,852 44,803 291,394 212,596 78,798 6,347 101,829 25,199 5,734 55,662
2022 Q1 203,130 96,245 56,206 20,915 11,178 7,946 73,584 54,234 19,350 615 22,252 8,975 1,459 13,972
Q2 204,740 101,822 60,363 17,194 11,246 13,019 67,763 46,755 21,008 1,521 24,441 7,564 1,630 13,758
Q3 185,552 82,392 43,431 17,598 10,724 10,639 71,164 49,323 21,841 1,471 21,657 7,115 1,753 11,320
Q4 221,464 109,652 67,205 21,704 13,186 7,557 72,339 47,889 24,451 2,740 28,302 6,444 1,987 15,514
2023 Q1 199,764 94,453 55,669 19,728 10,700 8,357 73,522 52,197 21,325 370 23,110 6,815 1,494 13,591
Q2 199,993 98,917 59,538 15,467 12,406 11,506 67,260 47,855 19,405 1,499 24,740 6,142 1,435 13,396
Q3 208,722 98,832 56,370 17,010 9,902 15,550 76,093 56,986 19,106 1,583 24,665 6,160 1,389 13,388
Q4 221,295 107,069 64,651 21,184 11,844 9,390 74,519 55,557 18,962 2,895 29,314 6,082 1,417 15,287
2024 Q1 202,975 97,423 57,101 19,102 10,141 11,080 73,613 56,469 17,144 489 23,846 6,478 1,125 14,168
2023 Apr. 53,953 23,064 19,855 –112 1,128 2,193 19,788 13,838 5,950 1,231 7,358 2,021 492 3,633
2024 Apr. 58,136 24,043 20,954 –361 –155 3,604 22,567 16,494 6,073 1,354 7,685 2,041 446 3,934
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations.  1 This total, unlike
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of untrans-
ferred tax shares.  2 Respective percentage share of central, state and local government
in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corporation tax and
non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on interest income and
capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12.  3 After deducting child benefits
and subsidies for supplementary private pension plans.  4 After deducting employeerefunds and research grants.  5 After deducting research grants.  6 Final withholding tax
on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings.  7 The allocation
of revenue to central, state and local government, which is adjusted at more regular
intervals, is regulated in Section 1 of the Revenue Adjustment Act. Respective percent-
age share of central, state and local government in revenue for 2023: 47.5:49.7:2.8.
The EU share is deducted from central government's share.  8 Respective percentage
share of central and state government for 2023: 41.4:58.6.  9 For the breakdown, see
Table X. 7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
61•
X. Public finances in Germany
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
of which:
PeriodEnergy
taxSoli-
darity
surchargeTobacco
taxInsurance
taxMotor
vehicle
taxElectri-
city taxAlcohol
tax OtherTax on
the acqui-
sition of
land and
buildingsInherit-
ance
taxBetting
and
lottery
tax Other TotalLocal
business
tax 2Real
property
taxes
2017 41,022 17,953 14,399 13,269 8,948 6,944 2,094 – 4,695 13,139 6,114 1,837 1,115 68,522 52,899 13,966
2018 40,882 18,927 14,339 13,779 9,047 6,858 2,133 2,622 14,083 6,813 1,894 1,122 71,817 55,904 14,203
2019 40,683 19,646 14,257 14,136 9,372 6,689 2,118 2,648 15,789 6,987 1,975 1,099 71,661 55,527 14,439
2020 37,635 18,676 14,651 14,553 9,526 6,561 2,238 1,792 16,055 8,600 2,044 1,076 61,489 45,471 14,676
2021 37,120 11,028 14,733 14,980 9,546 6,691 2,089 1,984 18,335 9,824 2,333 1,121 77,335 61,251 14,985
2022 33,667 11,978 14,229 15,672 9,499 6,830 2,191 2,585 17,122 9,226 2,569 1,180 87,315 70,382 15,282
2023 36,658 12,239 14,672 16,851 9,514 6,832 2,159 2,904 12,203 9,286 2,477 1,233 92,466 75,265 15,493
2022 Q1 4,452 2,840 2,372 7,175 2,594 1,785 531 503 5,061 2,827 701 385 21,492 17,454 3,577
Q2 9,092 3,518 3,648 2,872 2,433 1,722 505 651 4,406 2,238 661 259 21,318 16,839 4,077
Q3 7,103 2,571 3,742 3,059 2,325 1,598 549 710 4,100 2,138 596 281 21,463 16,792 4,249
Q4 13,020 3,049 4,467 2,567 2,147 1,725 606 722 3,555 2,023 611 254 23,043 19,298 3,380
2023 Q1 4,362 2,888 2,669 7,637 2,632 1,749 530 643 3,362 2,368 666 420 21,555 17,471 3,610
Q2 8,796 3,649 3,830 3,091 2,475 1,669 517 712 2,937 2,323 615 267 22,731 18,117 4,192
Q3 9,477 2,607 3,879 3,309 2,339 1,749 532 773 2,997 2,302 577 284 23,013 18,294 4,271
Q4 14,023 3,095 4,294 2,813 2,068 1,665 580 776 2,907 2,292 620 263 25,168 21,383 3,421
2024 Q1 4,488 3,028 2,672 8,255 2,661 1,540 520 681 2,986 2,388 651 453 ... ... ...
2023 Apr. 2,827 614 1,104 1,054 769 574 185 229 904 804 230 82 . . .
2024 Apr. 2,777 652 1,404 1,116 868 486 137 245 1,016 735 204 87 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations.  1 For the sum total, see Table X. 6.  2 Including revenue from offshore wind
farms.
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets *
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  3
of which: of which:
Period TotalContri-
butions  2Payments
from central
government TotalPension
paymentsPensioners'
health
insuranceDeficit/
surplus Total Deposits  4 SecuritiesMemo item:
Administrative
assets
2017 299,826 211,424 87,502 299,297 255,261 18,028 + 529 35,366 33,740 1,335 4,032
2018 312,788 221,572 90,408 308,356 263,338 18,588 + 4,432 40,345 38,314 1,713 4,008
2019 327,298 232,014 94,467 325,436 277,282 20,960 + 1,861 42,963 40,531 2,074 3,974
2020 335,185 235,988 98,447 339,072 289,284 21,865 – 3,887 39,880 38,196 1,286 3,901
2021 348,679 245,185 102,772 347,486 296,343 22,734 + 1,192 42,014 40,320 1,241 3,807
2022 363,871 258,269 104,876 360,436 308,168 23,792 + 3,435 46,087 44,181 1,399 3,746
2023 382,540 271,852 108,836 381,073 325,369 25,346 + 1,467 48,869 46,649 1,637 3,697
2021 Q1 83,066 57,351 25,542 86,048 73,799 5,600 – 2,982 36,888 35,326 1,166 3,887
Q2 86,386 60,666 25,545 86,486 73,905 5,679 – 100 36,941 35,554 988 3,871
Q3 85,535 59,941 25,468 87,123 74,453 5,718 – 1,588 36,041 34,670 973 3,840
Q4 92,818 67,211 25,415 87,385 74,556 5,730 + 5,432 41,974 40,310 1,241 3,835
2022 Q1 86,684 60,599 25,937 86,841 74,568 5,734 – 157 41,784 39,952 1,367 3,783
Q2 90,040 63,978 25,879 87,138 74,644 5,756 + 2,903 44,425 42,441 1,513 3,761
Q3 89,284 62,891 26,218 92,606 79,400 6,127 – 3,322 41,548 39,767 1,315 3,775
Q4 96,931 70,750 25,995 93,444 79,944 6,170 + 3,487 46,082 44,186 1,399 3,767
2023 Q1 91,370 64,171 26,972 92,422 79,330 6,142 – 1,052 45,109 43,030 1,569 3,724
Q2 94,735 67,459 26,942 92,585 79,177 6,165 + 2,151 47,245 45,043 1,693 3,705
Q3 93,776 66,300 26,950 97,619 83,549 6,513 – 3,843 44,354 42,208 1,632 3,703
Q4 101,578 73,852 27,041 97,967 83,678 6,520 + 3,611 48,825 46,660 1,637 3,697
2024 Q1 96,340 67,378 28,344 97,801 83,894 6,560 – 1,461 46,926 44,166 2,179 3,758
Sources: German pension insurance scheme and Bundesbank calculations.  * Excluding
the German pension insurance scheme for mining, railway and maritime industries. The
final annual figures generally differ from the total of the reported quarterly figures as
the latter are not revised.  1 Including financial compensation payments. Excluding in-vestment spending and proceeds.  2 Including contributions for recipients of govern-
ment cash benefits.  3 Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or
quarter.  4 Including cash.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
62•
X. Public finance in Germany
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development *
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Period Total  1 ContributionsInsolvency
compen-
sation levy TotalUnemploy-
ment benefit  2Short-time
working
benefits  3Job
promotion  4Insolvency
benefit
paymentAdminis-
trative
expenditure  5Deficit/
surplusMemo item:
Deficit-
offsetting
grant or loan
from central
government
2017 37,819 32,501 882 31,867 14,055 769 7,043 687 6,444 + 5,952 –
2018 39,335 34,172 622 33,107 13,757 761 6,951 588 8,129 + 6,228 –
2019 35,285 29,851 638 33,154 15,009 772 7,302 842 6,252 + 2,131 –
2020 33,678 28,236 630 61,013 20,617 22,719 7,384 1,214 6,076 –27,335 6,913
2021 35,830 29,571 1,302 57,570 19,460 21,003 7,475 493 6,080 –21,739 16,935
2022 37,831 31,651 1,062 37,530 16,588 3,779 7,125 534 6,256 + 300 423
2023 42,245 36,058 748 39,233 18,799 981 7,614 1,236 7,006 + 3,012 – 423
2021 Q1 8,228 6,747 289 18,260 5,956 8,006 1,935 184 1,391 –10,033 –
Q2 8,830 7,301 324 16,720 5,029 7,495 1,912 108 1,452 – 7,890 –
Q3 8,791 7,290 330 12,042 4,447 3,631 1,744 91 1,452 – 3,251 –
Q4 9,982 8,234 359 10,547 4,028 1,871 1,884 110 1,785 – 565 16,935
2022 Q1 8,827 7,374 251 10,685 4,424 2,037 1,821 135 1,412 – 1,858 –
Q2 9,327 7,857 262 9,457 4,091 1,180 1,794 147 1,450 – 130 –
Q3 9,278 7,740 261 8,401 4,056 406 1,621 107 1,506 + 877 –
Q4 10,398 8,679 289 8,987 4,016 156 1,889 145 1,888 + 1,411 423
2023 Q1 9,836 8,442 178 9,942 4,727 408 1,858 376 1,550 – 106 –
Q2 10,387 8,976 186 9,661 4,604 290 1,902 271 1,689 + 726 –
Q3 10,361 8,804 182 9,351 4,712 140 1,775 284 1,691 + 1,010 –
Q4 11,661 9,836 202 10,278 4,755 144 2,079 306 2,076 + 1,382 – 423
2024 Q1 10,298 8,903 183 11,237 5,511 465 2,074 380 1,729 – 939 –
Source: Federal Employment Agency and Bundesbank calculations.  * Including transfers
to the civil servants' pension fund.  1 Excluding central government deficit-offsetting
grant or loan.  2 Unemployment benefit in case of unemployment.  3 Including seasonal
short-time working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, re-
structuring measures and refunds of social contributions.  4 Vocational training, meas-ures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, integration, compensation top-up pay-
ments and promotion of business start-ups.  5 Including collection charges to other
social security funds, excluding administrative expenditure within the framework of the
basic allowance for job seekers.
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1
of which: of which:
Period TotalContri-
butions Central
government
funds  2 TotalHospital
treatmentPharma-
ceuticalsMedical
treatmentDental
treatment  3Remedies
and
therapeutic
appliancesSickness
benefitsAdminis-
trative
expend-
iture  4Deficit/
surplus
2017 233,814 216,227 14,500 230,773 72,303 37,389 38,792 14,070 14,776 12,281 10,912 +3,041
2018 242,360 224,912 14,500 239,706 74,506 38,327 39,968 14,490 15,965 13,090 11,564 +2,654
2019 251,295 233,125 14,500 252,440 77,551 40,635 41,541 15,010 17,656 14,402 11,136 –1,145
2020 269,158 237,588 27,940 275,268 78,531 42,906 44,131 14,967 18,133 15,956 11,864 –6,110
2021 289,270 249,734 36,977 294,602 82,748 46,199 45,058 16,335 20,163 16,612 11,727 –5,332
2022 315,248 262,367 50,223 310,594 85,061 48,354 46,379 16,737 21,259 17,947 12,418 +4,654
p 2023 304,318 278,740 21,896 309,451 90,467 49,753 47,199 17,654 23,143 19,111 12,817 –5,134
2021 Q1 72,970 59,338 13,303 72,660 19,631 11,175 11,564 4,069 4,564 4,287 2,967 + 310
Q2 71,964 61,819 9,965 74,492 20,287 11,275 11,536 4,219 5,085 4,120 2,850 –2,529
Q3 70,592 61,899 7,942 73,569 20,748 11,756 10,730 4,060 5,085 4,004 2,849 –2,977
Q4 74,020 66,678 5,767 73,209 21,340 12,043 11,252 4,062 5,290 4,200 3,109 + 810
2022 Q1 79,253 62,142 17,049 81,493 20,550 11,891 11,847 4,286 5,216 4,574 3,510 –2,240
Q2 79,112 64,611 14,280 79,269 21,080 12,053 11,753 4,249 5,335 4,457 2,958 – 158
Q3 75,516 65,242 9,804 75,011 21,164 12,221 11,384 3,956 5,352 4,441 2,996 + 505
Q4 81,512 70,384 9,091 74,894 21,659 12,242 11,566 4,310 5,442 4,486 3,148 +6,617
2023 Q1 73,718 66,513 6,759 77,593 22,196 12,209 12,012 4,370 5,621 4,927 3,169 –3,875
Q2 73,722 68,792 4,495 76,031 22,421 12,284 11,762 4,476 5,762 4,682 3,166 –2,309
Q3 75,330 69,236 5,244 76,967 22,632 12,540 11,502 4,371 5,958 4,695 3,030 –1,637
Q4 81,548 74,199 5,399 78,860 23,218 12,720 11,923 4,437 5,802 4,809 3,452 +2,688
Source: Federal Ministry of Health and Bundesbank calculations.  1 The final annual fig-
ures generally differ from the total of the reported quarterly figures as the latter are not
revised. Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compensationscheme.  2 Federal grant and liquidity assistance.  3 Including dentures.  4 Net, i.e. after
deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying contributions incurred by other
social security funds.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
63•
X. Public finances in Germany
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development *
€ million
Revenue Expenditure  1
of which: of which:
Period Total Contributions TotalNon-cash
care benefitsInpatient
care total  2Nursing
benefitContributions to
pension insur-
ance scheme  3Administrative
expenditureDeficit/
surplus
2017 36,305 36,248 38,862 6,923 16,034 10,010 1,611 1,606 – 2,557
2018 37,949 37,886 41,265 7,703 16,216 10,809 2,093 1,586 – 3,315
2019 47,228 46,508 44,008 8,257 16,717 11,689 2,392 1,781 + 3,220
2020 50,622 48,003 49,284 8,794 16,459 12,786 2,714 1,946 + 1,338
2021 52,573 49,764 53,903 9,573 16,511 13,865 3,070 2,024 – 1,330
2022 57,944 52,604 60,100 10,405 20,542 14,872 3,223 2,166 – 2,156
p 2023 61,015 58,534 59,231 11,351 22,474 16,177 3,552 2,261 + 1,784
2021 Q1 12,093 11,831 13,344 2,355 3,971 3,387 725 512 – 1,251
Q2 12,933 12,329 13,521 2,287 4,030 3,421 745 510 – 587
Q3 12,624 12,294 13,390 2,393 4,182 3,466 783 509 – 767
Q4 14,853 13,242 13,595 2,475 4,270 3,646 788 503 + 1,258
2022 Q1 12,912 12,412 14,739 2,564 4,974 3,572 775 529 – 1,827
Q2 15,350 12,951 14,827 2,464 5,026 3,698 795 548 + 523
Q3 13,708 13,021 15,387 2,638 5,197 3,755 802 542 – 1,679
Q4 15,813 14,067 15,078 2,581 5,281 3,892 837 528 + 735
2023 Q1 14,283 13,169 14,698 2,876 5,377 3,846 843 570 – 415
Q2 14,227 13,668 14,392 2,745 5,539 3,940 869 561 – 165
Q3 15,585 15,228 14,823 2,867 5,776 4,074 891 571 + 762
Q4 16,920 16,469 15,317 2,863 5,782 4,317 949 560 + 1,603
Source: Federal Ministry of Health and Bundesbank calculations.  * The final annual fig-
ures generally differ from the total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the
latter are not revised.  1 Including transfers to the long-term care provident fund.  2 In-cluding benefits for short-term care and daytime/night-time nursing care, inter alia.
3 For non-professional carers.
12. Maastricht debt by creditor
€ million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Bundesbank Domestic MFIsOther domestic
financial corporations Other domestic creditors Foreign creditors
of which: of which: of which: of which: of which: Period
(end of year
or quarter) Total Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities
2017 2,130,324 319,159 305,301 546,063 194,619 180,104 81,125 56,798 10,456 1,028,201 941,750
2018 2,083,675 364,731 350,487 504,476 167,506 186,346 89,794 56,071 8,725 972,052 892,222
2019 2,069,889 366,562 352,025 468,957 158,119 183,714 88,771 61,050 7,225 989,606 908,749
2020 2,340,849 522,392 507,534 505,373 157,828 191,231 99,840 54,238 8,373 1,067,615 996,417
2021 2,495,538 716,004 700,921 497,968 144,646 191,580 103,049 51,633 7,435 1,038,353 969,245
2022 2,561,674 742,514 727,298 509,098 128,892 210,885 126,039 58,443 10,782 1,040,734 975,548
p 2023 2,622,669 696,287 680,801 459,844 126,481 207,203 124,202 73,584 23,030 1,185,751 1,120,906
2021 Q1 2,369,872 561,444 546,540 480,026 162,961 190,136 99,333 63,796 8,060 1,074,470 1,010,641
Q2 2,419,762 620,473 605,430 482,767 151,182 189,993 99,735 52,647 7,699 1,073,882 1,008,532
Q3 2,453,545 669,659 654,600 484,986 152,068 191,571 101,742 54,275 8,070 1,053,054 987,736
Q4 2,495,538 716,004 700,921 497,968 144,646 191,580 103,049 51,633 7,435 1,038,353 969,245
2022 Q1 2,499,123 737,978 722,843 481,772 143,411 194,096 106,165 50,834 6,959 1,034,442 967,915
Q2 2,537,416 759,385 744,213 485,392 133,999 202,681 115,577 53,647 8,086 1,036,310 970,547
Q3 2,551,282 741,360 726,147 515,152 126,865 202,278 116,268 53,764 8,987 1,038,727 968,178
Q4 2,561,674 742,514 727,298 509,098 128,892 210,885 126,039 58,443 10,782 1,040,734 975,548
p 2023 Q1 2,587,201 741,587 726,326 480,915 129,372 208,934 124,777 63,214 16,123 1,092,551 1,029,541
pQ2 2,586,471 719,981 704,639 458,262 126,047 209,153 124,769 66,017 20,887 1,133,059 1,069,273
pQ3 2,627,247 706,113 690,704 453,923 126,673 208,036 124,077 69,123 23,354 1,190,052 1,124,364
pQ4 2,622,669 696,287 680,801 459,844 126,481 207,203 124,202 73,584 23,030 1,185,751 1,120,906
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
64•
X. Public finances in Germany
13. Maastricht debt by instrument
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:  2
Period
(end of year
or quarter) TotalCurrency
and deposits  1Short-term
debt securities
(up to one year)Long-term
debt securities
(more than one year)Short-term loans
(up to one year)Long-term loans
(more than one year)Debt vis-à-vis
other government
subsectorsClaims vis-à-vis
other government
subsectors
General government
2017 2,130,324 14,298 48,789 1,484,462 88,841 493,934 . .
2018 2,083,675 14,680 52,572 1,456,160 79,171 481,091 . .
2019 2,069,889 14,449 56,350 1,458,540 64,464 476,086 . .
2020 2,340,849 14,486 173,851 1,596,141 85,384 470,987 . .
2021 Q1 2,369,872 12,283 190,039 1,637,496 62,705 467,348 . .
Q2 2,419,762 13,065 182,676 1,689,902 69,170 464,949 . .
Q3 2,453,545 13,565 192,489 1,711,727 70,496 465,268 . .
Q4 2,495,538 17,743 195,421 1,729,876 88,481 464,017 . .
2022 Q1 2,499,123 15,676 172,809 1,774,484 70,930 465,223 . .
Q2 2,537,416 17,793 161,844 1,810,578 76,484 470,717 . .
Q3 2,551,282 22,631 149,825 1,796,620 82,049 500,157 . .
Q4 2,561,674 16,985 150,371 1,818,189 112,199 463,932 . .
p 2023 Q1 2,587,201 14,994 145,736 1,880,403 83,437 462,631 . .
pQ2 2,586,471 14,990 154,379 1,891,236 66,864 459,003 . .
pQ3 2,627,247 17,760 165,992 1,923,180 59,627 460,688 . .
pQ4 2,622,669 16,514 148,889 1,926,532 66,232 464,502 . .
Central government
2017 1,361,492 14,298 36,297 1,131,896 48,305 130,696 1,131 10,618
2018 1,334,500 14,680 42,246 1,107,140 43,067 127,367 933 9,975
2019 1,312,338 14,449 38,480 1,101,866 29,956 127,587 605 10,301
2020 1,526,491 14,486 154,498 1,180,683 48,414 128,410 609 14,521
2021 Q1 1,552,060 12,283 167,485 1,212,495 31,284 128,513 604 22,929
Q2 1,602,137 13,065 165,374 1,259,206 36,297 128,195 647 29,448
Q3 1,630,056 13,565 170,962 1,280,586 37,116 127,826 693 31,382
Q4 1,679,310 17,743 176,428 1,300,416 57,779 126,943 618 8,078
2022 Q1 1,684,290 15,676 155,123 1,340,340 41,680 131,472 576 10,430
Q2 1,723,415 17,793 147,681 1,373,616 47,196 137,129 623 10,491
Q3 1,757,005 22,631 144,999 1,369,628 55,559 164,188 828 13,101
Q4 1,775,982 16,985 146,989 1,391,638 93,352 127,017 8,815 9,011
p 2023 Q1 1,798,688 14,994 140,641 1,456,147 59,981 126,926 3,664 10,500
pQ2 1,806,085 14,990 150,168 1,471,888 41,802 127,237 2,889 11,235
pQ3 1,848,614 17,760 161,140 1,503,891 38,943 126,880 6,373 9,852
pQ4 1,850,057 16,514 144,507 1,511,599 51,457 125,980 15,858 9,103
State government
2017 616,785 – 12,543 354,688 19,790 229,764 14,038 2,046
2018 603,166 – 10,332 351,994 19,250 221,590 14,035 1,891
2019 612,698 – 17,873 360,495 19,076 215,254 14,934 1,826
2020 664,421 – 19,354 419,862 19,481 205,724 11,924 1,410
2021 Q1 667,651 – 22,556 429,623 14,375 201,097 10,942 1,995
Q2 667,940 – 17,304 435,709 16,178 198,750 12,454 2,041
Q3 673,373 – 21,528 436,499 16,334 199,012 11,414 2,110
Q4 665,250 – 18,994 434,930 14,074 197,252 12,441 1,772
2022 Q1 663,426 – 17,688 439,767 12,533 193,438 11,634 1,915
Q2 660,169 – 14,166 442,621 12,404 190,979 11,393 1,742
Q3 643,826 – 4,828 432,653 14,873 191,472 14,067 2,147
Q4 634,151 – 3,384 432,186 9,881 188,700 11,585 1,719
p 2023 Q1 631,953 – 5,099 429,985 10,976 185,893 11,918 2,360
pQ2 624,231 – 4,215 424,818 11,908 183,291 13,336 2,041
pQ3 621,611 – 4,856 424,945 8,727 183,084 11,049 2,629
pQ4 623,057 – 4,392 421,349 12,631 184,684 11,519 5,357
Local government
2017 168,304 – – 3,082 24,909 140,313 1,881 466
2018 162,175 – 1 3,046 20,903 138,225 1,884 497
2019 161,367 – – 2,996 19,607 138,763 1,856 532
2020 163,163 – – 3,366 18,520 141,276 1,402 330
2021 Q1 163,189 – – 3,121 17,998 142,070 2,009 325
Q2 164,321 – – 3,121 18,969 142,231 2,070 323
Q3 163,772 – – 3,000 18,156 142,616 2,127 321
Q4 165,316 – – 3,241 18,011 144,064 1,813 313
2022 Q1 164,860 – – 3,052 17,532 144,276 1,884 349
Q2 166,840 – – 2,902 17,566 146,373 1,724 370
Q3 166,624 – – 2,856 15,623 148,145 2,098 392
Q4 172,244 – – 2,896 17,917 151,431 1,614 399
p 2023 Q1 173,042 – – 2,883 17,102 153,057 2,163 422
pQ2 172,832 – – 2,988 17,678 152,166 1,746 748
pQ3 175,462 – – 2,825 18,287 154,350 2,329 796
pQ4 177,735 – – 2,884 17,295 157,557 2,385 798
For footnotes see end of table.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
65•
X. Public finances in Germany
13. Maastricht debt by instrument (cont´d)
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:   2
Period
(end of year
or quarter) TotalCurrency
and deposits  1Short-term
debt securities
(up to one year)Long-term
debt securities
(more than one year)Short-term loans
(up to one year)Long-term loans
(more than one year)Debt vis-à-vis
other government
subsectorsClaims vis-à-vis
other government
subsectors
Social security funds
2017 807 – – – 262 545 15 3,934
2018 704 – – – 388 316 16 4,506
2019 899 – – – 375 524 16 4,753
2020 7,641 – – – 7,128 513 6,931 4,606
2021 Q1 16,381 – – – 15,985 395 15,853 4,160
Q2 21,395 – – – 20,995 400 20,860 4,220
Q3 24,449 – – – 24,053 395 23,872 4,292
Q4 553 – – – 131 422 19 4,729
2022 Q1 3,378 – – – 2,883 496 2,739 4,140
Q2 3,690 – – – 3,098 592 2,958 4,095
Q3 4,151 – – – 3,459 692 3,330 4,683
Q4 2,755 – – – 608 2,147 1,442 12,328
p 2023 Q1 3,527 – – – 1,411 2,115 2,263 6,728
pQ2 2,736 – – – 595 2,141 1,442 5,389
pQ3 3,754 – – – 1,600 2,154 2,442 8,917
pQ4 2,624 – – – 742 1,882 1,042 15,547
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office and
the Federal Republic of Germany - Finance Agency.  1 Particularly liabilities resulting
from coins in circulation.  2 Besides direct loan relationships, claims and debt vis-à-visother government subsectors also comprise securities holdings purchased on the
market. No entry for general government as debt and claims are consolidated between
different government subsectors.
14. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category
€ million
Currency and deposits  2Debt securities
of which:  3 of which:  3
Period
(end of year
or quarter) Total  1 Total  1Federal
day bond Total  1Conventional
Federal
bonds
(Bunds)Conventional
Federal
notes
(Bobls)Conventional
Federal
Treasury
notes
(Schätze)  4Treasury
discount
paper
(Bubills)  5Federal
savings
notesGreen
Federal
securitiesInflation-
linked
Federal
securities  6Capital
indexation
of inflation-
linked
securities Loans  1
2007 987,909 6,675 . 917,584 564,137 173,949 102,083 37,385 10,287 . 13,464 506 63,650
2008 1,019,905 12,466 3,174 928,754 571,913 164,514 105,684 40,795 9,649 . 19,540 1,336 78,685
2009 1,086,173 9,981 2,495 1,013,072 577,798 166,471 113,637 104,409 9,471 . 24,730 1,369 63,121
2010 1,337,160 10,890 1,975 1,084,019 602,624 185,586 126,220 85,867 8,704 . 35,906 2,396 242,251
2011 1,346,869 10,429 2,154 1,121,331 615,200 199,284 130,648 58,297 8,208 . 44,241 3,961 215,109
2012 1,390,377 9,742 1,725 1,177,168 631,425 217,586 117,719 56,222 6,818 . 52,119 5,374 203,467
2013 1,392,735 10,582 1,397 1,192,025 643,200 234,759 110,029 50,004 4,488 . 51,718 4,730 190,127
2014 1,398,472 12,146 1,187 1,206,203 653,823 244,633 103,445 27,951 2,375 . 63,245 5,368 180,123
2015 1,371,933 13,949 1,070 1,188,463 663,296 232,387 96,389 18,536 1,305 . 74,495 5,607 169,521
2016 1,365,579 15,491 1,010 1,179,062 670,245 221,551 95,727 23,609 737 . 66,464 3,602 171,026
2017 1,361,492 14,298 966 1,168,193 693,687 203,899 91,013 10,037 289 . 72,855 4,720 179,001
2018 1,334,500 14,680 921 1,149,386 710,513 182,847 86,009 12,949 48 . 64,647 5,139 170,435
2019 1,312,338 14,449 –1,140,346 719,747 174,719 89,230 13,487 . . 69,805 6,021 157,543
2020 1,526,491 14,486 .1,335,181 801,910 179,560 98,543 113,141 . 9,876 58,279 3,692 176,824
2021 1,679,310 17,743 .1,476,844 892,464 190,839 103,936 153,978 . 21,627 65,390 6,722 184,722
2022 1,775,982 16,985 .1,538,628 947,349 198,084 113,141 137,990 . 36,411 72,357 15,844 220,369
p 2023 1,850,057 16,514 .1,656,105 1,045,613 216,276 119,180 135,469 . 53,965 60,470 14,686 177,438
2021 Q1 1,552,060 12,283 .1,379,980 814,864 189,935 103,910 134,800 . 11,026 60,687 3,857 159,797
Q2 1,602,137 13,065 .1,424,579 861,455 184,413 104,997 139,451 . 16,526 62,569 5,056 164,492
Q3 1,630,056 13,565 .1,451,549 869,195 198,692 105,398 146,533 . 19,824 63,851 5,456 164,942
Q4 1,679,310 17,743 .1,476,844 892,464 190,839 103,936 153,978 . 21,627 65,390 6,722 184,722
2022 Q1 1,684,290 15,676 .1,495,463 911,280 204,534 108,702 140,427 . 23,961 67,776 7,809 173,152
Q2 1,723,415 17,793 .1,521,297 937,949 198,472 111,343 138,495 . 29,425 70,217 11,209 184,325
Q3 1,757,005 22,631 .1,514,627 918,838 208,509 111,675 137,740 . 35,527 71,498 12,879 219,747
Q4 1,775,982 16,985 .1,538,628 947,349 198,084 113,141 137,990 . 36,411 72,357 15,844 220,369
p 2023 Q1 1,798,688 14,994 .1,596,787 987,363 213,514 120,904 127,143 . 39,459 73,591 15,497 186,907
pQ2 1,806,085 14,990 .1,622,056 1,007,004 211,742 124,160 139,012 . 50,243 59,227 13,604 169,039
pQ3 1,848,614 17,760 .1,665,030 1,021,675 226,340 125,255 148,407 . 52,763 59,923 13,863 165,823
pQ4 1,850,057 16,514 .1,656,105 1,045,613 216,276 119,180 135,469 . 53,965 60,470 14,686 177,438
Sources: Federal Republic of Germany - Finance Agency, Federal Statistical Office, and
Bundesbank calculations.  1 Comprises all of central government, i.e. all off-budget en-
tities in addition to the core budget, including the government-owned bad bank FMS
Wertmanagement and liabilities attributed to central government from an economic
perspective under the European System of Accounts (ESA) 2010.  2 Particularly liabilitiesresulting from coins in circulation.  3 Issuances by the Federal Republic of Germany. Ex-
cluding issuers' holdings of own securities but including those held by other govern-
ment entities.  4 Including medium-term notes issued by the Treuhand agency (expired
in 2011).  5 Including Federal Treasury financing papers (expired in 2014).  6 Excluding
inflation-induced indexation of capital.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
66•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
2022 2023 2024
2021 2022 2023 2021 2022 2023 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
Item Index 2015=100 Annual percentage change
At constant prices, chained
 I. Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 108.2 107.6 106.0 7.4 –0.5 –1.5 0.3 –2.1 1.2 –1.2 –3.3 –2.7 –4.7
Construction 97.4 94.1 93.7 –5.3 –3.3 –0.4 –4.9 –7.0 –1.9 –1.1 0.8 0.3 –0.9
Wholesale/retail trade, transport and
storage, hotel and restaurant services 102.8 106.3 105.2 1.2 3.3 –1.0 1.6 –0.9 0.3 –1.7 –1.3 –1.2 –0.5
Information and communication 130.1 136.5 140.4 7.8 5.0 2.8 6.8 3.8 2.8 3.2 2.5 2.9 1.9
Financial and insurance activities 100.8 105.0 103.9 6.8 4.2 –1.1 2.9 6.3 1.5 –0.7 –1.4 –3.7 –1.2
Real estate activities 102.6 103.5 104.7 1.4 0.8 1.1 0.8 –0.3 0.9 0.6 1.6 1.4 1.2
Business services  1 109.7 112.5 113.1 4.6 2.6 0.5 1.0 1.0 –0.1 0.5 0.7 0.9 0.7
Public services, education and health 106.8 109.6 111.1 1.2 2.7 1.4 2.5 3.1 3.0 1.3 0.4 0.9 0.8
Other services 90.3 95.7 97.7 0.2 6.0 2.0 2.4 5.7 2.1 1.4 1.5 3.1 1.7
Gross value added 106.1 107.9 107.9 3.3 1.7 0.1 1.3 0.3 1.0 –0.0 –0.5 –0.2 –0.9
Gross domestic product  2 106.3 108.2 108.0 3.2 1.8 –0.2 1.2 0.2 0.5 –0.3 –0.5 –0.4 –0.9
 II. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 102.4 106.4 105.6 1.5 3.9 –0.7 1.8 0.2 –0.1 –0.6 –1.6 –0.4 0.0
Government consumption 117.5 119.3 118.1 3.1 1.6 –1.0 0.1 0.1 –2.3 –2.6 0.0 0.8 1.5
Machinery and equipment 103.4 107.5 110.5 2.8 4.0 2.8 9.5 4.9 7.1 4.5 1.4 –1.0 –4.4
Premises 110.0 108.0 105.1 –2.6 –1.8 –2.7 –1.6 –4.8 –4.1 –2.4 –2.0 –2.3 –2.1
Other investment  4 116.7 115.8 115.1 2.1 –0.7 –0.6 –1.3 1.0 –0.8 –0.8 –0.6 –0.3 –0.5
Changes in inventories  5,6 . . . 0.9 0.7 –0.3 1.7 1.3 0.2 0.2 –0.8 –0.8 –0.9
Domestic demand 108.4 111.8 110.7 2.5 3.2 –1.1 3.1 1.2 –0.5 –0.7 –1.7 –1.3 –1.2
Net exports  6 . . . 0.9 –1.2 0.8 –1.8 –0.9 0.8 0.4 1.3 1.0 0.3
     Exports 111.8 115.5 114.8 9.7 3.3 –0.7 5.3 –0.2 3.0 –0.3 –2.6 –2.7 –2.8
     Imports 118.0 125.9 122.8 8.9 6.6 –2.4 10.3 1.8 1.6 –1.1 –5.2 –4.7 –3.8
Gross domestic product  2 106.3 108.2 108.0 3.2 1.8 –0.2 1.2 0.2 0.5 –0.3 –0.5 –0.4 –0.9
At current prices (€ billion)
 III. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 1,785.5 1,979.3 2,090.6 4.5 10.9 5.6 9.3 8.5 8.1 6.3 4.4 4.0 2.9
Government consumption 796.8 850.9 891.5 6.3 6.8 4.8 5.7 5.8 2.1 4.2 6.8 5.9 7.4
Machinery and equipment 227.5 253.4 275.1 4.8 11.4 8.6 18.1 13.1 15.1 11.3 6.4 3.3 –1.9
Premises 406.5 463.5 486.0 5.7 14.0 4.9 13.3 9.9 10.0 5.3 3.4 1.2 0.1
Other investment  4 136.5 139.3 141.9 3.8 2.1 1.9 1.9 2.2 1.6 1.9 2.1 1.9 1.0
Changes in inventories  5 69.4 114.1 50.2 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 3,422.2 3,800.5 3,935.3 6.7 11.1 3.5 11.3 8.1 5.8 3.8 1.9 2.9 2.0
Net exports 195.3 76.3 186.9 . . . . . . . . . .
     Exports 1,710.3 1,974.2 1,973.3 15.6 15.4 –0.0 19.0 9.1 7.9 0.4 –4.6 –3.3 –2.3
     Imports 1,515.0 1,897.9 1,786.4 18.2 25.3 –5.9 33.3 13.4 4.7 –4.6 –12.9 –9.1 –6.4
Gross domestic product  2 3,617.5 3,876.8 4,122.2 6.3 7.2 6.3 5.8 6.2 7.4 6.2 6.2 5.6 3.6
 IV. Prices (2015=100)
Private consumption 108.8 116.1 123.5 3.0 6.7 6.4 7.4 8.3 8.2 6.9 6.0 4.5 2.9
Gross domestic product 112.5 118.4 126.1 3.0 5.3 6.5 4.5 6.0 6.9 6.6 6.7 6.0 4.6
Terms of trade 99.8 95.0 99.1 –2.9 –4.9 4.3 –6.5 –1.9 1.7 4.4 6.7 4.2 3.2
 V. Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,918.3 2,023.6 2,159.4 3.5 5.5 6.7 4.3 5.4 6.7 7.1 7.2 6.0 6.2
Entrepreneurial and property income 851.0 867.4 921.9 19.5 1.9 6.3 3.8 –0.6 9.0 9.5 5.7 1.0 –5.7
National income 2,769.3 2,890.9 3,081.4 7.9 4.4 6.6 4.2 3.7 7.4 7.8 6.7 4.7 2.2
Memo item: Gross national income 3,756.8 4,027.6 4,287.8 7.3 7.2 6.5 5.8 6.0 7.2 6.5 6.6 5.6 3.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2024.  1 Professional, sci-
entific, technical, administration and support service activities.  2 Gross value added plus
taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products).  3 Including non-profit institu-tions serving households.  4 Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft ware
and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets.  5 Including net in-
crease in valuables.  6 Contribution of growth to GDP .

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
67•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
2. Output in the production sector *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Production
sector,
totalConstruc-
tion Energy Total Inter-
mediate
goods 
Capital
goods 
Durable
goodsNon-
durable
goodsManu-
facture of
basic metals
and
fabricated
metal
productsManu-
facture of
computers,
electronic
and optical
products
and electrical
equipmentMacinery
and
equipmentMotor
vehicels,
trailers
and semi-
trailers
2021 = 100
% of total  1   100 17.08 8.21 74.71 27.84 33.97 2.53 10.36 9.71 9.59 11.83 12.21
Period
2020 95.9 101.4 96.9 94.8 91.9 96.7 93.5 97.5 91.0 90.0 92.6 101.7
2 2021 99.3 99.1 99.9 99.3 99.4 99.2 99.2 99.4 99.4 99.3 99.3 99.0
2022 98.7 96.7 98.7 99.2 96.3 101.1 101.0 100.1 97.3 102.9 100.2 103.0
2023 97.0 95.6 84.8 98.6 90.7 106.4 93.5 95.6 93.5 103.7 99.3 116.1
2023 Q1 97.1 82.4 98.2 100.3 94.5 106.6 98.3 95.7 95.9 105.8 96.2 124.2
Q2 97.9 98.4 77.7 100.0 92.7 108.0 92.5 95.2 95.9 103.9 99.5 121.5
Q3 95.7 100.2 72.8 97.2 90.7 103.1 92.1 96.6 93.4 104.4 98.8 107.1
Q4 97.2 101.4 90.6 96.9 84.8 107.9 91.1 94.9 88.8 100.9 102.7 111.6
x 2024 Q1 92.2 80.4 90.7 95.0 89.3 99.8 89.0 96.1 90.5 95.5 89.8 111.1
2023 Apr. 97.1 96.9 85.4 98.5 92.4 105.1 92.6 94.4 95.5 101.3 95.3 119.5
May 97.3 98.3 75.4 99.5 92.4 107.9 91.1 93.1 95.5 102.3 97.8 124.4
June 99.3 100.0 72.4 102.1 93.4 111.0 93.9 98.2 96.7 108.0 105.4 120.5
3 July 97.6 105.1 75.4 98.4 92.4 104.0 91.4 97.6 94.2 104.1 99.4 108.7
3 Aug. 89.5 94.3 71.5 90.4 87.6 91.8 84.7 94.7 89.7 100.8 89.4 90.3
Sep. 100.0 101.3 71.5 102.8 92.1 113.4 100.3 97.4 96.4 108.3 107.6 122.3
Oct. 98.3 101.2 84.0 99.2 91.7 105.9 96.2 98.2 95.1 103.8 95.5 116.7
Nov. 102.1 103.4 91.1 103.0 91.2 114.5 97.2 98.7 95.2 105.0 103.1 128.4
Dec. 91.1 99.6 96.8 88.5 71.5 103.3 79.8 87.7 76.0 93.8 109.6 89.8
x 2024 Jan. 83.7 63.0 99.0 86.8 84.3 87.5 81.3 92.3 85.1 89.9 80.1 95.0
x Feb. 90.8 81.0 86.0 93.5 87.7 98.7 89.7 93.0 88.6 93.0 87.7 112.9
x Mar. 102.0 97.2 87.0 104.8 95.9 113.2 95.9 103.1 97.9 103.7 101.6 125.5
x,p Apr. 93.3 92.1 81.1 95.0 88.4 101.1 87.5 94.4 89.7 93.2 88.4 117.4
Annual percentage change
2020 – 7.7 + 2.9 – 6.6 – 9.8 – 6.9 –14.0 – 8.2 – 3.8 –11.9 – 7.4 –13.5 –20.1
2 2021 + 3.5 – 2.3 + 3.1 + 4.7 + 8.2 + 2.6 + 6.1 + 1.9 + 9.2 +10.3 + 7.2 – 2.7
2022 – 0.6 – 2.4 – 1.2 – 0.1 – 3.1 + 1.9 + 1.8 + 0.7 – 2.1 + 3.6 + 0.9 + 4.0
2023 – 1.7 – 1.1 –14.1 – 0.6 – 5.8 + 5.2 – 7.4 – 4.5 – 3.9 + 0.8 – 0.9 +12.7
2023 Q1 + 0.4 – 2.4 –10.8 + 2.2 – 5.8 +11.7 – 1.5 – 4.7 – 3.7 + 5.6 + 2.6 +27.0
Q2 – 0.3 – 0.2 –18.3 + 1.6 – 6.2 + 9.8 – 8.6 – 2.1 – 3.3 + 3.5 + 2.0 +20.7
Q3 – 2.9 + 0.1 –20.7 – 1.7 – 5.8 + 2.8 – 8.7 – 4.1 – 3.4 – 1.2 – 1.0 + 5.9
Q4 – 4.1 – 2.1 – 7.2 – 4.2 – 5.4 – 2.3 –10.6 – 6.9 – 5.3 – 4.4 – 6.2 – 0.7
x 2024 Q1 – 5.0 – 2.5 – 7.6 – 5.2 – 5.5 – 6.3 – 9.5 + 0.4 – 5.6 – 9.7 – 6.7 –10.5
2023 Apr. + 0.5 + 0.7 –16.8 + 2.5 – 6.4 +12.2 – 8.6 – 1.3 – 3.3 + 3.6 + 3.5 +25.7
May + 0.4 + 0.5 –18.7 + 2.5 – 6.0 +12.4 – 9.4 – 3.5 – 2.9 + 3.0 + 3.1 +25.8
June – 1.9 – 1.9 –19.8 – 0.2 – 6.2 + 5.4 – 7.8 – 1.6 – 3.7 + 3.8 – 0.3 +11.8
3 July – 2.3 + 1.2 –20.6 – 1.1 – 6.6 + 3.5 – 6.5 – 0.5 – 4.4 ± 0.0 + 0.8 + 6.4
3 Aug. – 2.3 – 0.8 –20.3 – 0.7 – 4.7 + 4.1 – 9.3 – 2.5 – 1.2 ± 0.0 – 3.2 +13.7
Sep. – 3.9 – 0.1 –21.2 – 3.1 – 6.0 + 1.1 –10.0 – 8.9 – 4.4 – 3.4 – 0.8 + 0.5
Oct. – 4.0 – 3.2 –10.1 – 3.7 – 5.4 – 0.7 –10.6 – 7.7 – 6.1 – 2.6 – 6.7 + 4.0
Nov. – 4.5 – 2.8 – 7.4 – 4.5 – 6.2 – 2.6 –10.8 – 5.9 – 5.3 – 7.1 – 5.8 – 1.6
Dec. – 3.7 – 0.1 – 4.3 – 4.5 – 4.5 – 3.5 –10.4 – 7.0 – 4.3 – 3.3 – 6.0 – 5.0
x 2024 Jan. – 5.3 – 6.5 – 3.5 – 5.2 – 6.5 – 5.4 –10.2 – 0.5 – 5.2 – 8.0 – 5.4 – 9.6
x Feb. – 5.6 – 1.6 – 9.3 – 6.1 – 5.5 – 8.4 – 7.4 + 1.0 – 5.8 – 9.6 – 8.0 –13.0
x Mar. – 4.3 – 0.4 –10.4 – 4.4 – 4.5 – 5.3 –10.8 + 0.8 – 5.7 –11.1 – 6.4 – 8.9
x,p Apr. – 3.9 – 5.0 – 5.0 – 3.6 – 4.3 – 3.8 – 5.5 ± 0.0 – 6.1 – 8.0 – 7.2 – 1.8
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * For explanatory notes, see
Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tabels III.1.a to III.1.c  o Using
JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Share of gross value added at factor cost of the production
sector in the base year 2021.  2 Figures revised as of January 2021.  3 Influenced by achange in holiday dates.  x Provisional; estimated and adjusted in advance by the
Federal Statistical Office to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey and the
Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction industry, respectively.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
68•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
3. Orders received by industry *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Period 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change
Total
2021 99.4 +22.7 99.4 +27.3 99.4 +21.7 99.4 +11.2 99.4 +17.8 99.3 + 8.2
2022 105.1 + 5.7 110.3 +11.0 101.1 + 1.7 109.6 +10.3 113.2 +13.9 108.0 + 8.8
2023 101.2 – 3.7 100.0 – 9.3 101.6 + 0.5 105.1 – 4.1 100.4 –11.3 107.3 – 0.6
2023 Apr. 94.8 – 7.9 101.4 –11.0 89.3 – 4.8 104.2 –11.2 105.0 –21.3 103.9 – 5.5
May 100.6 – 2.6 99.2 –10.8 101.7 + 4.5 99.1 – 9.1 91.8 –26.7 102.4 + 0.7
June 113.0 + 4.8 102.0 –10.2 120.9 +17.6 108.3 – 6.2 105.3 – 8.5 109.6 – 5.3
July 95.7 –10.1 94.9 –17.2 95.1 – 6.4 104.8 + 1.9 88.5 –14.7 112.3 + 9.8
Aug. 89.8 – 5.9 90.7 –11.3 86.8 – 3.2 108.2 + 4.2 105.1 – 5.9 109.5 + 9.2
Sep. 98.6 – 4.3 96.6 – 8.2 99.6 – 0.4 100.7 –11.9 95.7 –16.2 103.0 – 9.9
Oct. 96.2 – 8.0 97.0 – 9.9 94.4 – 7.5 105.9 – 2.9 99.1 –15.2 108.9 + 3.1
Nov. 99.6 – 3.9 96.4 –10.6 100.4 + 0.5 109.7 – 0.1 112.1 + 9.6 108.6 – 4.0
Dec. 109.0 + 8.0 92.4 – 8.9 121.5 +19.9 96.5 + 1.7 88.2 – 7.0 100.3 + 5.7
2024 Jan. 98.2 – 5.0 98.1 –12.0 98.0 + 0.1 100.4 – 3.9 85.1 – 8.7 107.4 – 1.9
Feb. 96.3 – 8.7 94.4 –11.3 96.4 – 7.8 106.2 – 1.5 89.0 –15.2 114.0 + 4.5
Mar. 105.8 – 2.5 102.6 – 7.5 106.9 + 0.4 113.3 + 1.3 105.8 – 8.2 116.7 + 5.8
p Apr. 93.5 – 1.4 93.6 – 7.7 91.9 + 2.9 104.5 + 0.3 92.9 –11.5 109.8 + 5.7
From the domestic market
2021 99.3 +21.7 99.4 +26.9 99.2 +18.9 99.3 +10.2 99.2 + 8.9 99.3 +10.7
2022 105.6 + 6.3 112.5 +13.2 98.7 – 0.5 109.7 +10.5 111.2 +12.1 109.1 + 9.9
2023 100.9 – 4.5 103.1 – 8.4 99.1 + 0.4 99.7 – 9.1 99.5 –10.5 99.7 – 8.6
2023 Apr. 99.5 – 6.6 108.9 – 5.3 91.2 – 5.3 98.4 –21.2 103.6 –22.9 96.4 –20.5
May 105.7 + 0.1 103.4 – 8.8 109.1 +11.0 96.1 –10.1 99.3 –22.6 94.9 – 3.7
June 107.7 – 0.4 99.7 –12.5 116.6 +14.7 95.8 –17.2 93.9 –16.3 96.5 –17.6
July 98.4 – 8.1 97.5 –18.5 99.0 + 2.6 100.0 – 2.9 97.4 –13.3 101.0 + 1.7
Aug. 90.9 – 4.2 94.9 – 8.6 86.2 + 0.2 99.1 – 1.4 103.8 – 6.1 97.2 + 0.6
Sep. 93.7 – 9.7 95.4 –10.9 91.3 – 7.8 99.1 –14.9 103.3 – 5.2 97.5 –18.3
Oct. 96.0 – 7.3 100.2 – 9.9 91.2 – 4.5 102.9 – 8.4 93.6 –12.0 106.6 – 7.0
Nov. 99.1 – 6.5 100.0 –10.5 98.1 – 1.3 99.8 –13.9 97.4 –12.4 100.7 –14.4
Dec. 98.4 – 0.9 97.0 – 8.5 100.4 + 5.4 93.8 +10.5 89.9 + 5.8 95.3 +12.4
2024 Jan. 94.4 – 8.0 99.6 –13.2 89.7 – 2.9 94.3 – 4.1 85.5 – 9.9 97.8 – 1.8
Feb. 95.7 –10.1 96.4 –12.8 94.7 – 8.5 97.9 – 4.6 86.1 –13.6 102.6 – 1.2
Mar. 102.3 – 9.1 102.0 –11.1 102.3 – 7.6 104.2 – 5.4 101.0 –13.9 105.4 – 1.9
p Apr. 90.9 – 8.6 94.4 –13.3 87.0 – 4.6 96.2 – 2.2 91.2 –12.0 98.1 + 1.8
From abroad
2021 99.5 +23.6 99.4 +27.6 99.5 +23.1 99.4 +11.7 99.6 +23.4 99.3 + 6.5
2022 104.8 + 5.3 108.1 + 8.8 102.5 + 3.0 109.6 +10.3 114.4 +14.9 107.2 + 8.0
2023 101.5 – 3.1 96.8 –10.5 103.0 + 0.5 108.8 – 0.7 100.9 –11.8 112.8 + 5.2
2023 Apr. 91.5 – 8.8 93.9 –16.8 88.2 – 4.4 108.2 – 3.5 105.8 –20.4 109.4 + 7.4
May 97.0 – 4.5 95.0 –12.8 97.5 + 0.8 101.1 – 8.5 87.5 –29.1 107.9 + 3.8
June 116.8 + 8.7 104.3 – 7.9 123.3 +19.1 116.7 + 1.1 111.9 – 4.2 119.1 + 3.9
July 93.8 –11.5 92.3 –15.9 92.8 –11.2 108.1 + 5.4 83.3 –15.7 120.5 +15.3
Aug. 89.0 – 7.0 86.5 –14.1 87.2 – 5.0 114.3 + 7.7 105.9 – 5.8 118.5 +15.0
Sep. 102.1 – 0.3 97.7 – 5.5 104.4 + 3.8 101.8 – 9.8 91.4 –22.0 107.0 – 3.2
Oct. 96.4 – 8.5 93.8 –10.0 96.3 – 8.9 107.9 + 0.8 102.2 –16.8 110.6 +11.7
Nov. 100.0 – 1.8 92.8 –10.8 101.8 + 1.6 116.4 +10.2 120.5 +24.1 114.3 + 4.2
Dec. 116.6 +14.3 87.9 – 9.3 133.7 +27.7 98.4 – 3.2 87.2 –13.2 104.0 + 1.7
2024 Jan. 101.0 – 2.9 96.7 –10.8 102.8 + 1.7 104.5 – 3.9 84.8 – 8.0 114.4 – 2.1
Feb. 96.8 – 7.5 92.5 – 9.6 97.3 – 7.4 111.9 + 0.4 90.6 –16.2 122.4 + 8.3
Mar. 108.3 + 2.5 103.1 – 3.7 109.6 + 5.3 119.4 + 5.6 108.5 – 5.0 124.9 +11.0
p Apr. 95.3 + 4.2 92.9 – 1.1 94.7 + 7.4 110.2 + 1.8 93.9 –11.2 118.3 + 8.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; for ex-
planatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables
III.2.a to III.2.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
69•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
4. Orders received by construction *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1
Structural engineering
Total TotalResidential
constructionIndustrial
constructionPublic sector
constructionCivil
engineering 
Industrial clientsPublic
sector  2
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2020 145.6 –0.3 144.2 –0.8 160.8 +6.9 130.2 –8.7 141.5 +1.9 147.3 +0.1 139.6 –5.7 143.3 +1.4
2021 159.0 +9.2 164.1 +13.8 174.3 +8.4 156.6 +20.3 158.5 +12.0 153.0 +3.9 161.5 +15.7 146.7 +2.4
2022 166.8 +4.9 161.7 –1.5 167.7 –3.8 155.0 –1.0 166.8 +5.2 172.8 +12.9 171.9 +6.4 160.5 +9.4
2023 173.1 +3.8 154.5 –4.5 145.6 –13.2 151.7 –2.1 194.2 +16.4 194.8 +12.7 190.8 +11.0 169.6 +5.7
2023 Mar. 192.7 –8.0 179.4 –14.0 155.1 –29.3 197.1 –2.0 193.1 –3.5 208.3 –1.1 217.0 –0.1 187.8 –3.5
Apr. 169.9 +3.5 147.6 –6.4 144.6 –18.8 141.7 –0.8 179.7 +22.7 195.7 +13.9 178.3 +15.8 175.6 +4.8
May 176.1 +0.1 153.5 –10.8 153.9 –15.5 147.4 –9.6 175.1 +0.9 202.4 +12.3 187.5 +9.8 176.5 –0.9
June 181.0 +3.3 164.1 –1.3 165.3 –7.1 135.5 –11.6 266.8 +51.1 200.6 +8.1 178.7 +0.7 193.1 +12.9
July 194.4 +7.6 171.0 –4.7 160.9 –6.0 166.3 –6.6 221.6 +4.8 221.6 +21.7 190.6 +0.2 219.1 +24.8
Aug. 191.7 +21.9 153.7 +3.7 140.4 –3.2 156.6 +9.5 186.4 +4.7 235.9 +40.8 241.5 +54.9 165.7 –0.1
Sep. 192.8 +17.4 184.4 +15.7 145.1 –10.7 191.4 +24.4 288.2 +70.0 202.5 +19.2 223.9 +34.8 186.2 +14.1
Oct. 171.2 +5.8 145.2 +0.1 143.3 –3.4 141.5 +0.9 164.9 +7.8 201.6 +11.3 197.1 +14.3 158.6 +0.4
Nov. 147.1 –0.8 137.2 +1.9 124.2 –5.1 140.4 +10.6 168.0 –4.6 158.6 –3.3 170.0 +9.5 134.7 –10.7
Dec. 176.3 +6.2 161.4 –0.5 160.1 +3.4 140.6 –15.0 243.6 +39.6 193.6 +13.5 191.2 +1.4 169.0 +15.0
2024 Jan. 136.7 +3.4 118.4 –5.8 105.8 –16.6 122.2 –4.8 145.8 +30.1 157.9 +13.0 156.8 +7.5 132.4 +10.5
Feb. 154.4 +1.7 128.5 –1.5 126.2 –0.9 113.3 –14.8 192.6 +47.1 184.6 +4.5 165.0 –1.6 159.5 +7.4
Mar. 198.9 +3.2 169.3 –5.6 159.1 +2.6 164.1 –16.7 222.7 +15.3 233.2 +12.0 199.1 –8.2 222.9 +18.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; exclu-
ding value added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series – Seasonally adjustedbusiness statistics, Table III.2.f.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Excluding residential
construction.  2 Including road construction.
5. Retail trade turnover *
Adjusted for calendar variations o
of which:
In stores by enterprises main product range
Total 
Food, beverages,
tobacco  1Textiles,
clothing,
foodwear and
leather goodsInformation
and
communications
equipmentConstruction
and flooring
materials,
household
appliances,
furnitureRetail sale of
pharmaceutical
and medical
goods, cosmetic
and toilet
articlesRetail sale via
mail order houses
or via internet
as well as
other retail sale  2
At current
prices At 2015 prices At current prices
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2020 121.4 +5.6 115.9 +4.4 121.3 +8.1 81.9 –23.2 106.9 –1.8 117.1 +9.3 125.4 +5.6 168.6 +21.8
2021 124.7 +2.7 116.7 +0.7 121.7 +0.3 78.1 –4.6 95.4 –10.8 110.4 –5.7 135.2 +7.8 190.1 +12.8
2022 134.4 +7.8 115.8 –0.8 128.2 +5.3 102.9 +31.8 107.8 +13.0 122.8 +11.2 144.7 +7.0 188.9 –0.6
3 2023 137.7 +2.5 112.3 –3.0 136.0 +6.1 106.8 +3.8 107.9 +0.1 118.3 –3.7 149.5 +3.3 186.6 –1.2
2023 Apr. 137.6 +3.8 111.9 –4.0 137.3 +8.1 108.2 +6.4 95.0 +0.4 126.0 –3.4 144.0 +2.6 180.6 –2.1
May 140.9 +4.5 114.6 –1.8 139.4 +9.2 113.4 +3.1 91.8 +0.9 127.9 –1.2 147.9 +3.9 183.6 +1.0
June 138.0 +5.3 112.3 –0.5 136.7 +7.9 117.7 +11.5 95.4 +1.1 120.4 +0.2 148.5 +6.1 180.1 +3.2
July 139.6 +3.1 114.0 –1.6 139.9 +7.0 109.1 +3.3 99.8 –0.4 118.2 –3.4 152.9 +4.0 183.0 –1.2
Aug. 132.6 +2.2 107.9 –2.3 132.9 +5.2 102.4 +4.3 97.3 –1.7 111.2 –2.1 145.7 +4.5 168.6 –2.5
Sep. 133.0 ±0.0 107.4 –3.8 132.4 +6.3 105.0 –10.3 104.0 –4.2 112.4 –5.2 149.9 +3.8 169.2 –10.6
Oct. 141.7 +2.8 114.7 +0.1 137.2 +3.9 121.9 +5.1 111.5 –0.4 121.4 –3.3 156.5 +7.5 196.0 +1.3
Nov. 147.8 +1.0 120.1 –1.6 137.8 +4.2 117.8 +1.7 136.7 +1.3 122.0 –6.4 156.5 +2.2 231.9 –0.7
Dec. 154.5 +2.0 125.2 –0.5 155.2 +5.5 117.8 –5.2 142.7 –3.4 117.5 –6.6 166.8 +6.0 216.0 +1.3
2024 Jan. 126.8 +1.7 102.8 –1.2 127.8 +4.2 86.0 +1.4 106.8 –5.7 98.1 –7.2 150.5 +7.8 175.6 –0.5
Feb. 123.1 +0.1 99.3 –2.3 124.8 +1.3 83.5 ±0.0 97.5 –3.7 103.8 –4.1 145.9 +7.9 158.6 –5.3
Mar. 143.3 +2.9 114.9 +1.1 144.2 +4.9 104.7 +4.2 101.1 –5.2 126.9 –1.7 157.9 +5.3 186.9 +0.2
Apr. 140.1 +1.8 112.2 +0.3 140.6 +2.4 109.1 +0.8 94.1 –0.9 122.9 –2.5 152.4 +5.8 179.4 –0.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * Excluding value added tax;
for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics,
Table III.4.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Including stalls and markets.  2 Excludingstores, stalls and markets.  3 As of January 2023 figures are provisional, partially revised,
and particularly uncertain in recent months due to estimates for missing reports.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
70•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
6. Labour market *
Employment  1 Employment subject to social contributions  2 Short-time workers  3 Unemployment  4
Total of which: of which: of which:
Produc-
tion 
sectorServices 
excluding 
temporary 
employ-
mentTemporary 
employ-
mentSolely
jobs
exempt
from
social
contri-
butions  2TotalCyclically
induced TotalAssigned
to the
legal
category
of the
Third Book
of the
Social
Security
Code
(SGB III)
PeriodThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
changeThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
change ThousandsUnem-
ploy-
ment
rate 
in %  4,5Vacan-
cies, 
thou-
sands  4,6
2019 45,276 +0.9 33,518 +1.7 9,479 23,043 751 4,579 145 60 72,267 827 7 5.0 774
2020 44,915 –0.8 33,579 +0.2 9,395 23,277 660 4,290 2,939 2,847 2,695 1,137 5.9 613
2021 44,984 +0.2 33,897 +0.9 9,344 23,602 702 4,101 1,852 1,744 2,613 999 5.7 706
2022 45,596 +1.4 34,507 +1.8 9,400 24,135 721 4,125 426 337 2,418 808 5.3 845
2023 45,932 +0.7 834,790 8+0.8 89,424 824,430 8 687 84,198 ... 8 147 2,609 875 5.7 761
2021 Q1 44,518 –1.4 33,568 –0.2 9,294 23,376 665 4,051 3,473 3,157 2,878 1,248 6.3 586
Q2 44,815 +0.2 33,718 +0.9 9,322 23,446 697 4,066 2,164 2,143 2,691 1,024 5.9 658
Q3 45,161 +0.8 33,929 +1.5 9,347 23,606 719 4,161 935 915 2,545 920 5.5 774
Q4 45,443 +1.0 34,374 +1.6 9,415 23,982 727 4,125 835 762 2,341 802 5.1 804
2022 Q1 45,199 +1.5 34,242 +2.0 9,348 23,943 715 4,061 1,033 792 2,417 874 5.3 818
Q2 45,519 +1.6 34,401 +2.0 9,372 24,056 718 4,112 337 324 2,311 777 5.0 864
Q3 45,707 +1.2 34,522 +1.7 9,405 24,133 724 4,159 103 92 2,501 804 5.5 880
Q4 45,959 +1.1 34,864 +1.4 9,475 24,409 730 4,166 229 139 2,443 778 5.3 817
2023 Q1 45,638 +1.0 34,614 +1.1 9,395 24,288 696 4,152 430 153 2,610 900 5.7 773
Q2 45,906 +0.9 34,702 +0.9 9,410 24,352 687 4,209 152 146 2,561 839 5.6 770
Q3 46,014 +0.7 34,762 +0.7 9,421 24,398 686 4,242 128 122 2,647 885 5.7 768
Q4 46,171 +0.5 835,080 8+0.6 89,471 824,681 8 680 84,189 ... 8 166 2,617 874 5.7 732
2024 Q1 945,767 9 +0.3 834,791 8+0.5 89,367 824,561 8 631 84,154 ... 8 203 2,796 1,000 6.1 704
2021 Jan. 44,493 –1.5 33,515 –0.3 9,282 23,347 657 4,045 3,638 3,294 2,901 1,298 6.3 566
Feb. 44,490 –1.5 33,521 –0.3 9,281 23,343 662 4,026 3,766 3,358 2,904 1,270 6.3 583
Mar. 44,570 –1.1 33,636 –0.0 9,309 23,397 685 4,032 3,016 2,818 2,827 1,177 6.2 609
Apr. 44,680 –0.3 33,689 +0.8 9,324 23,427 687 4,039 2,583 2,560 2,771 1,091 6.0 629
May 44,799 +0.3 33,747 +1.3 9,326 23,461 703 4,067 2,342 2,320 2,687 1,020 5.9 654
June 44,966 +0.6 33,802 +1.4 9,324 23,504 716 4,151 1,568 1,548 2,614 961 5.7 693
July 45,030 +0.7 33,731 +1.5 9,304 23,458 715 4,194 1,088 1,068 2,590 956 5.6 744
Aug. 45,101 +0.8 33,994 +1.5 9,358 23,658 722 4,153 857 838 2,578 940 5.6 779
Sep. 45,352 +0.8 34,323 +1.6 9,432 23,903 726 4,123 859 839 2,465 864 5.4 799
Oct. 45,440 +0.8 34,369 +1.5 9,425 23,965 724 4,123 780 762 2,377 814 5.2 809
Nov. 45,496 +1.0 34,449 +1.6 9,423 24,039 739 4,133 767 750 2,317 789 5.1 808
Dec. 45,393 +1.2 34,284 +1.7 9,364 23,980 708 4,112 957 772 2,330 803 5.1 794
2022 Jan. 45,126 +1.4 34,176 +2.0 9,332 23,900 711 4,048 1,123 847 2,462 903 5.4 792
Feb. 45,187 +1.6 34,243 +2.2 9,346 23,939 719 4,049 1,087 803 2,428 884 5.3 822
Mar. 45,284 +1.6 34,334 +2.1 9,369 23,999 719 4,061 888 727 2,362 835 5.1 839
Apr. 45,399 +1.6 34,368 +2.0 9,366 24,037 713 4,091 453 439 2,309 800 5.0 852
May 45,536 +1.6 34,445 +2.1 9,376 24,089 719 4,131 318 305 2,260 771 4.9 865
June 45,623 +1.5 34,445 +1.9 9,376 24,084 724 4,164 241 228 2,363 761 5.2 877
July 45,584 +1.2 34,322 +1.8 9,361 23,988 718 4,176 115 102 2,470 801 5.4 881
Aug. 45,643 +1.2 34,571 +1.7 9,417 24,169 725 4,151 87 76 2,547 827 5.6 887
Sep. 45,894 +1.2 34,899 +1.7 9,499 24,401 733 4,136 108 97 2,486 782 5.4 873
Oct. 45,990 +1.2 34,893 +1.5 9,489 24,414 734 4,161 134 124 2,442 764 5.3 846
Nov. 46,006 +1.1 34,897 +1.3 9,478 24,435 738 4,179 156 147 2,434 770 5.3 823
Dec. 45,882 +1.1 34,705 +1.2 9,414 24,357 704 4,182 397 146 2,454 799 5.4 781
2023 Jan. 45,570 +1.0 34,550 +1.1 9,381 24,240 697 4,138 451 145 2,616 911 5.7 764
Feb. 45,632 +1.0 34,601 +1.0 9,392 24,279 692 4,148 441 157 2,620 910 5.7 778
Mar. 45,713 +0.9 34,679 +1.0 9,412 24,332 692 4,157 398 159 2,594 878 5.7 777
Apr. 45,809 +0.9 34,685 +0.9 9,410 24,342 684 4,188 146 139 2,586 855 5.7 773
May 45,920 +0.8 34,728 +0.8 9,413 24,371 687 4,228 149 142 2,544 829 5.5 767
June 45,989 +0.8 34,709 +0.8 9,404 24,357 690 4,266 162 156 2,555 833 5.5 769
July 45,958 +0.8 34,584 +0.8 9,382 24,261 687 4,279 113 107 2,617 878 5.7 772
Aug. 45,944 +0.7 34,804 +0.7 9,429 24,433 685 4,221 113 107 2,696 910 5.8 771
Sep. 46,139 +0.5 35,089 +0.5 9,500 24,641 684 4,186 158 152 2,627 869 5.7 761
Oct. 46,208 +0.5 35,117 +0.6 9,490 24,686 686 4,181 183 177 2,607 861 5.7 749
Nov. 46,221 +0.5 35,126 +0.7 9,473 24,719 688 4,195 181 174 2,606 865 5.6 733
Dec. 46,084 +0.4 834,907 8+0.6 89,400 824,632 8 647 84,197 ... 8 148 2,637 896 5.7 713
2024 Jan. 45,728 +0.3 834,747 8+0.6 89,359 824,524 8 635 84,138 ... 8 189 2,805 1,006 6.1 699
Feb. 45,759 +0.3 834,766 8+0.5 89,360 824,546 8 626 84,144 ... 8 200 2,814 1,015 6.1 706
Mar. 945,813 9 +0.2 834,813 8+0.4 89,363 824,593 8 616 84,165 ... 8 219 2,769 977 6.0 707
Apr. 945,918 9 +0.2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,750 949 6.0 701
May ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,723 930 10 5.8 702
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency.  * Annual and quarterly
figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the official figures are
due to rounding.  1 Workplace concept; averages.  2 Monthly figures: end of month.
3 Number within a given month.  4 Mid-month level.  5 Relative to the total civilian
labour force.  6 Excluding government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs,
including jobs located abroad.  7 Statistical break due to late recording of unemployed
persons in the legal category of the Second Book of the Social Security Code (SGB II).8 Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. In 2021 and 2022,
the estimated values for Germany deviated from the final data by a maximum of 0.1%
for employees subject to social contributions, by a maximum of 0.5% for persons
solely in jobs exempt from social contributions, and by a maximum of 61,3% for
cyclically induced short-time work.  9 Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statis-
tical Office.  10 From May 2024, calculated on the basis of new labour force figures.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
71•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
7. Prices
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
of which: Indices of
foreign trade prices
of which:
Total Food  1,2Non-
energy
industrial
goods  1 Energy  1 Services  1Actual
rents
for
housingMemo item:
Consumer
price index
(national
concept)Con-
struction
price
indexIndex of
producer
prices of
industrial
products
sold on
the
domestic
market  3Index of
producer
prices of
agri-
cultural
products  3 Exports Imports
Period 2015 = 100 2020 = 100 2015 = 100 2021 = 100 2020 = 100 2021=100
Index level
2020 4 105.8 4 110.9 4 104.1 4 99.0 4 106.9 107.6 4 100.0 4 117.0 91.2 100.0 ... ...
2021 4 109.2 4 114.1 4 106.7 4 109.0 4 109.0 109.0 4 103.1 4 127.0 100.0 107.0 100.0 100.0
2022 118.7 126.2 112.7 146.8 112.2 110.8 110.2 148.3 129.8 141.2 113.5 121.8
2023 125.9 140.9 119.1 154.2 117.6 113.1 116.7 161.2 130.1 5 141.3 114.2 113.9
2022 July 119.0 127.6 112.6 147.8 112.1 110.9 110.3 132.7 142.1 116.0 125.1
Aug. 119.5 129.1 113.0 148.6 112.2 111.1 110.7 151.7 139.9 144.8 117.9 128.6
Sep. 122.1 130.9 114.5 158.8 113.9 111.2 112.7 142.3 148.7 117.1 127.3
Oct. 123.5 132.2 115.8 164.5 114.3 111.4 113.5 139.3 151.7 115.4 125.3
Nov. 123.5 133.6 116.3 163.5 113.7 111.6 113.7 155.4 135.0 152.3 115.2 121.5
Dec. 122.0 134.6 116.6 143.9 114.8 111.7 113.2 134.2 152.4 115.1 120.1
2023 Jan. 122.6 136.7 116.4 154.8 113.8 112.1 114.3 133.5 5 150.0 115.1 118.7
Feb. 123.8 139.5 117.0 154.9 115.0 112.2 115.2 159.7 132.5 149.0 115.1 117.2
Mar. 125.1 141.3 118.3 155.0 116.1 112.5 116.1 131.1 144.9 115.0 116.1
Apr. 125.8 141.1 119.0 156.1 117.1 112.6 116.6 131.8 142.2 114.6 114.6
May 125.6 141.1 119.3 154.0 116.9 112.8 116.5 161.0 130.4 139.4 114.2 113.2
June 126.1 141.2 119.5 153.7 117.8 113.0 116.8 129.8 141.6 114.0 112.3
July 126.7 141.2 118.8 153.6 119.6 113.2 117.1 128.9 142.8 113.7 111.6
Aug. 127.2 141.0 119.2 156.5 119.8 113.5 117.5 161.6 129.2 142.8 113.7 112.0
Sep. 127.4 141.5 120.1 157.6 119.3 113.6 117.8 129.3 137.8 114.0 113.3
Oct. 127.2 141.6 120.5 154.7 119.1 113.7 117.8 129.1 135.3 114.1 113.4
Nov. 126.3 142.4 120.5 151.6 117.6 113.9 117.3 162.4 128.3 135.7 113.8 112.8
Dec. 126.6 142.4 120.5 148.4 118.7 114.0 117.4 127.3 137.6 113.5 111.7
2024 Jan. 126.4 143.7 119.7 150.2 118.1 114.4 117.6 127.6 138.9 113.6 111.7
Feb. 127.2 143.6 120.3 150.9 119.3 114.6 118.1 164.6 127.1 140.4 113.8 111.5
Mar. 128.0 143.5 120.9 150.5 120.7 114.9 118.6 127.3 141.7 113.9 111.9
Apr. 128.8 144.3 121.1 154.0 121.3 115.1 119.2 127.5 142.7 114.4 112.7
May 129.1 144.0 120.9 152.1 122.4 115.3 119.3 ... ... ... ... ...
Annual percentage change
2020 4 +0.4 4+ 2.3 4– 0.1 4– 4.5 4+ 1.2 + 1.4 4 +0.5 4+ 1.4 – 1.0 – 3.1 ... ...
2021 4 +3.2 4+ 2.9 4+ 2.5 4+ 10.1 4+ 2.0 + 1.3 4 +3.1 4+ 8.6 + 9.6 + 7.0 ... ...
2022 +8.7 + 10.6 + 5.7 + 34.7 + 2.9 + 1.7 +6.9 +16.8 +29.8 +32.0 +13.5 +21.8
2023 +6.0 + 11.7 + 5.6 + 5.1 + 4.8 + 2.1 +5.9 + 8.7 + 0.2 5+ 0.1 + 0.6 – 6.5
2022 July +8.5 + 11.5 + 5.8 + 35.6 + 1.7 + 1.6 +6.7 +33.0 +31.8 +15.7 +24.6
Aug. +8.8 + 12.8 + 6.1 + 35.8 + 1.7 + 1.7 +7.0 +17.2 +38.5 +33.3 +16.7 +26.7
Sep. +10.9 + 14.4 + 6.4 + 44.2 + 3.6 + 1.7 +8.6 +38.6 +39.1 +15.0 +24.0
Oct. +11.6 + 15.5 + 7.2 + 43.5 + 3.9 + 1.7 +8.8 +31.7 +38.8 +12.0 +18.2
Nov. +11.3 + 16.3 + 7.3 + 40.1 + 3.8 + 1.9 +8.8 +17.5 +26.4 +34.2 +10.9 +12.3
Dec. +9.6 + 16.3 + 7.4 + 25.1 + 4.1 + 1.9 +8.1 +21.4 +32.8 + 9.8 + 9.6
2023 Jan. +9.2 + 16.6 + 7.4 + 25.1 + 3.6 + 2.0 +8.7 +16.4 5+28.1 + 8.1 + 5.3
Feb. +9.3 + 18.0 + 7.2 + 21.6 + 4.4 + 2.0 +8.7 +15.6 +13.9 +23.1 + 6.6 + 3.1
Mar. +7.8 + 18.6 + 7.2 + 6.1 + 5.0 + 2.1 +7.4 + 7.5 + 6.0 + 3.3 – 3.1
Apr. +7.6 + 15.5 + 6.9 + 9.4 + 4.8 + 2.0 +7.2 + 5.2 – 1.1 + 1.7 – 5.6
May +6.3 + 13.6 + 6.2 + 5.0 + 4.4 + 2.0 +6.1 + 8.9 + 2.5 – 2.6 + 0.9 – 7.7
June +6.8 + 12.6 + 6.2 + 4.0 + 6.1 + 2.0 +6.4 + 1.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 8.6
July +6.5 + 10.7 + 5.5 + 3.9 + 6.7 + 2.1 +6.2 – 2.9 + 0.5 – 2.0 –10.8
Aug. +6.4 + 9.2 + 5.5 + 5.3 + 6.8 + 2.2 +6.1 + 6.5 – 7.6 – 1.4 – 3.6 –12.9
Sep. +4.3 + 8.1 + 4.9 – 0.8 + 4.7 + 2.2 +4.5 – 9.1 – 7.3 – 2.6 –11.0
Oct. +3.0 + 7.1 + 4.1 – 6.0 + 4.2 + 2.1 +3.8 – 7.3 –10.8 – 1.1 – 9.5
Nov. +2.3 + 6.6 + 3.6 – 7.3 + 3.4 + 2.1 +3.2 + 4.5 – 5.0 –10.9 – 1.2 – 7.2
Dec. +3.8 + 5.8 + 3.3 + 3.1 + 3.4 + 2.1 +3.7 – 5.1 – 9.7 – 1.4 – 7.0
2024 Jan. +3.1 + 5.1 + 2.8 – 3.0 + 3.8 + 2.1 +2.9 – 4.4 – 7.4 – 1.3 – 5.9
Feb. +2.7 + 2.9 + 2.8 – 2.6 + 3.7 + 2.1 +2.5 + 3.1 – 4.1 – 5.8 – 1.1 – 4.9
Mar. +2.3 + 1.6 + 2.2 – 2.9 + 4.0 + 2.1 +2.2 – 2.9 – 2.2 – 1.0 – 3.6
Apr. +2.4 + 2.3 + 1.8 – 1.3 + 3.6 + 2.2 +2.2 – 3.3 + 0.4 – 0.2 – 1.7
May +2.8 + 2.1 + 1.3 – 1.2 + 4.7 + 2.2 +2.4 ... ... ... ... ...
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data
from the Federal Statistical Office.  1 The last data point is at times based on the Bun-
desbank’s own estimates.  2 Including alcoholic beverages and tobacco.  3 Excluding va-lue added tax.  4 Influenced by a temporary reduction of value added tax between July
and December 2020.  5 From January 2023 onwards, provisional figures.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
72•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
8. Households' income *
Gross wages and
salaries  1Net wages and
salaries  2Monetary social
benefits received  3 Mass income  4 Disposable income  5 Saving  6Saving
ratio  7
Period € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
changeAs
percentage
2016 1,337.4 4.0 896.3 3.8 426.2 3.8 1,322.5 3.8 1,841.5 3.3 187.8 4.7 10.2
2017 1,395.4 4.3 932.5 4.0 441.8 3.6 1,374.3 3.9 1,905.2 3.5 202.8 8.0 10.6
2018 1,462.7 4.8 976.1 4.7 455.2 3.0 1,431.3 4.1 1,976.6 3.7 223.2 10.1 11.3
2019 1,524.7 4.2 1,021.8 4.7 477.5 4.9 1,499.3 4.8 2,024.4 2.4 219.8 – 1.5 10.9
2020 1,515.3 – 0.6 1,021.1 – 0.1 523.9 9.7 1,545.0 3.0 2,046.9 1.1 338.2 53.9 16.5
2021 1,571.3 3.7 1,062.9 4.1 534.1 1.9 1,597.0 3.4 2,098.5 2.5 313.0 – 7.5 14.9
2022 1,661.8 5.8 1,118.8 5.3 541.8 1.4 1,660.6 4.0 2,227.5 6.1 248.2 –20.7 11.1
2023 1,779.6 7.1 1,219.9 9.0 577.7 6.6 1,797.6 8.2 2,357.4 5.8 266.9 7.5 11.3
2022 Q4 463.0 5.5 312.0 5.4 136.6 5.5 448.6 5.5 575.1 7.4 60.2 – 1.1 10.5
2023 Q1 416.8 7.1 285.9 9.2 144.2 7.0 430.1 8.5 580.2 7.0 77.6 0.1 13.4
Q2 429.7 7.6 287.8 9.7 141.3 7.0 429.1 8.8 582.8 7.1 64.0 14.4 11.0
Q3 441.0 7.5 307.9 8.9 146.3 5.7 454.2 7.8 594.0 5.0 60.4 10.6 10.2
Q4 492.2 6.3 338.3 8.4 145.9 6.9 484.3 8.0 600.5 4.4 64.9 7.9 10.8
2024 Q1 443.9 6.5 307.4 7.5 152.1 5.5 459.5 6.8 607.7 4.7 90.4 16.5 14.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2024.  * Households includ-
ing non-profit institutions serving households.  1 Residence concept.  2 After deducting
the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees' contributions to the
social security funds.  3 Social security benefits in cash from the social security funds,
central, state and local government and foreign countries, pension payments (net),
private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social benefits,
consumption-related taxes and public charges.  4 Net wages and salaries plus monetarysocial benefits received.  5 Mass income plus operating surplus, mixed income, property
income (net), other current transfers received, income of non-profit institutions serving
households, less taxes (excluding wage tax and consumption-related taxes) and other
current transfers paid. Including the increase in claims on company pension funds.  6 In-
cluding the increase in claims on company pension funds.  7 Saving as a percentage of
disposable income.
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
Index of negotiated wages  1
On a monthly basis
On an hourly basis TotalTotal excluding
one-off payments Basic pay rates  2Memo item:
Wages and salaries
per employee  3
Period 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change
2016 102.2 2.2 102.2 2.2 102.2 2.2 102.3 2.3 102.5 2.5
2017 104.6 2.3 104.5 2.3 104.6 2.3 104.8 2.4 105.1 2.6
2018 107.7 3.0 107.7 3.0 107.6 2.8 107.7 2.8 108.4 3.2
2019 110.9 3.0 110.8 3.0 110.7 2.9 110.4 2.5 111.7 3.0
2020 113.3 2.2 113.3 2.2 113.0 2.1 112.7 2.1 111.6 – 0.1
2021 115.0 1.5 115.0 1.5 114.9 1.7 114.5 1.5 115.3 3.3
2022 118.0 2.6 118.0 2.6 117.3 2.1 116.8 2.0 120.1 4.1
2023 122.8 4.0 122.7 4.0 120.5 2.7 119.9 2.7 127.5 6.2
2022 Q4 130.2 1.9 130.1 1.9 130.1 1.9 117.8 2.3 132.6 4.2
2023 Q1 115.2 3.8 115.2 3.8 111.8 2.6 118.7 2.6 120.1 5.9
Q2 114.3 3.9 114.3 3.9 112.1 2.5 119.5 2.5 123.2 6.6
Q3 126.7 4.7 126.6 4.7 124.9 3.2 120.5 3.0 126.3 6.6
Q4 134.9 3.7 134.9 3.7 133.4 2.5 120.8 2.5 140.2 5.7
2024 Q1 122.3 6.2 122.3 6.2 115.2 3.1 122.3 3.0 127.4 6.1
2023 Oct. 115.2 4.7 115.1 4.7 112.8 2.6 120.7 2.6 . .
Nov. 173.5 3.2 173.5 3.2 172.5 2.5 120.8 2.7 . .
Dec. 116.1 3.3 116.0 3.3 114.9 2.4 120.9 2.4 . .
2024 Jan. 117.3 1.1 117.3 1.1 113.7 2.5 121.6 2.5 . .
Feb. 124.7 5.9 124.7 5.9 116.3 2.6 121.6 2.5 . .
Mar. 125.1 11.8 125.0 11.8 115.5 4.1 123.6 4.1 . .
Apr. 117.8 4.8 117.7 4.8 116.5 3.9 123.9 3.9 . .
1 Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports.  2 Excluding
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such as
annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13th monthly salary payment) andretirement provisions).  3 Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May
2024.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
73•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
End of year/half
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which: of which: Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which:
PeriodTotal
assetsNon-
current
assetsIntangible
assetsTangible
assetsFinancial
assetsCurrent
assetsInven-
toriesTrade
receiv-
ables Cash  1 Equity Total Totalof which:
Financial
debt TotalFinancial
debtTrade
payables
Total (€ billion)
2020 2,850.0 1,797.3 607.6 733.1 335.1 1,052.7 243.6 225.9 240.5 811.5 2,038.5 1,181.5 746.4 857.0 304.4 196.1
2021 3,292.0 1,971.6 680.1 773.8 384.8 1,320.4 272.1 261.5 261.5 994.4 2,297.6 1,206.9 772.1 1,090.7 321.4 236.7
2022 3,431.6 2,057.0 713.5 804.3 410.1 1,374.6 326.2 268.3 244.3 1,133.2 2,298.4 1,195.7 760.2 1,102.8 331.8 273.3
p 2023 3,320.5 2,038.7 699.2 823.2 374.4 1,281.8 325.2 259.9 245.6 1,145.4 2,175.1 1,146.3 771.1 1,028.8 347.3 261.7
2022 H1 3,593.6 2,108.1 719.1 796.3 447.4 1,485.5 322.4 284.8 225.4 1,075.4 2,518.2 1,237.0 789.5 1,281.2 313.7 260.7
H2 3,431.6 2,057.0 713.5 804.3 410.1 1,374.6 326.2 268.3 244.3 1,133.2 2,298.4 1,195.7 760.2 1,102.8 331.8 273.3
2023 H1 3,322.4 2,009.5 699.5 799.0 373.5 1,312.9 343.9 263.7 234.3 1,134.0 2,188.3 1,130.8 752.5 1,057.5 327.4 259.9
pH2 3,320.5 2,038.7 699.2 823.2 374.4 1,281.8 325.2 259.9 245.6 1,145.4 2,175.1 1,146.3 771.1 1,028.8 347.3 261.7
As a percentage of total assets
2020 100.0 63.1 21.3 25.7 11.8 36.9 8.6 7.9 8.4 28.5 71.5 41.5 26.2 30.1 10.7 6.9
2021 100.0 59.9 20.7 23.5 11.7 40.1 8.3 7.9 7.9 30.2 69.8 36.7 23.5 33.1 9.8 7.2
2022 100.0 59.9 20.8 23.4 12.0 40.1 9.5 7.8 7.1 33.0 67.0 34.8 22.2 32.1 9.7 8.0
p 2023 100.0 61.4 21.1 24.8 11.3 38.6 9.8 7.8 7.4 34.5 65.5 34.5 23.2 31.0 10.5 7.9
2022 H1 100.0 58.7 20.0 22.2 12.5 41.3 9.0 7.9 6.3 29.9 70.1 34.4 22.0 35.7 8.7 7.3
H2 100.0 59.9 20.8 23.4 12.0 40.1 9.5 7.8 7.1 33.0 67.0 34.8 22.2 32.1 9.7 8.0
2023 H1 100.0 60.5 21.1 24.1 11.2 39.5 10.4 7.9 7.1 34.1 65.9 34.0 22.7 31.8 9.9 7.8
pH2 100.0 61.4 21.1 24.8 11.3 38.6 9.8 7.8 7.4 34.5 65.5 34.5 23.2 31.0 10.5 7.9
Groups with a focus on the production sector (€ billion) 2
2020 2,265.0 1,354.9 399.1 543.5 320.0 910.1 228.7 179.5 187.9 636.3 1,628.8 904.7 537.0 724.0 267.3 149.8
2021 2,626.3 1,479.3 441.7 573.9 363.5 1,147.0 254.4 206.3 204.2 764.7 1,861.6 918.5 548.5 943.2 285.9 184.0
2022 2,730.8 1,538.3 461.5 591.7 388.3 1,192.4 307.7 209.1 186.5 879.7 1,851.1 912.7 534.3 938.4 291.2 215.2
p 2023 2,620.2 1,512.9 446.6 604.5 352.1 1,107.3 305.2 202.2 203.4 888.8 1,731.4 859.8 544.6 871.6 308.2 206.6
2022 H1 2,898.3 1,582.5 462.4 583.8 422.6 1,315.9 303.6 222.5 177.2 830.9 2,067.4 945.2 558.2 1,122.2 272.8 207.6
H2 2,730.8 1,538.3 461.5 591.7 388.3 1,192.4 307.7 209.1 186.5 879.7 1,851.1 912.7 534.3 938.4 291.2 215.2
2023 H1 2,651.0 1,504.1 460.3 588.8 348.8 1,146.8 326.4 210.9 183.6 892.6 1,758.4 854.6 532.3 903.8 282.9 210.1
pH2 2,620.2 1,512.9 446.6 604.5 352.1 1,107.3 305.2 202.2 203.4 888.8 1,731.4 859.8 544.6 871.6 308.2 206.6
As a percentage of total assets
2020 100.0 59.8 17.6 24.0 14.1 40.2 10.1 7.9 8.3 28.1 71.9 39.9 23.7 32.0 11.8 6.6
2021 100.0 56.3 16.8 21.9 13.8 43.7 9.7 7.9 7.8 29.1 70.9 35.0 20.9 35.9 10.9 7.0
2022 100.0 56.3 16.9 21.7 14.2 43.7 11.3 7.7 6.8 32.2 67.8 33.4 19.6 34.4 10.7 7.9
p 2023 100.0 57.7 17.0 23.1 13.4 42.3 11.7 7.7 7.8 33.9 66.1 32.8 20.8 33.3 11.8 7.9
2022 H1 100.0 54.6 16.0 20.1 14.6 45.4 10.5 7.7 6.1 28.7 71.3 32.6 19.3 38.7 9.4 7.2
H2 100.0 56.3 16.9 21.7 14.2 43.7 11.3 7.7 6.8 32.2 67.8 33.4 19.6 34.4 10.7 7.9
2023 H1 100.0 56.7 17.4 22.2 13.2 43.3 12.3 8.0 6.9 33.7 66.3 32.2 20.1 34.1 10.7 7.9
pH2 100.0 57.7 17.0 23.1 13.4 42.3 11.7 7.7 7.8 33.9 66.1 32.8 20.8 33.3 11.8 7.9
Groups with a focus on the services sector (€ billion)  
2020 585.0 442.4 208.5 189.6 15.1 142.6 14.9 46.4 52.6 175.3 409.7 276.7 209.4 133.0 37.1 46.3
2021 665.7 492.2 238.5 200.0 21.3 173.5 17.7 55.2 57.3 229.7 436.0 288.4 223.6 147.6 35.5 52.6
2022 700.9 518.7 251.9 212.5 21.8 182.2 18.5 59.1 57.8 253.5 447.3 283.0 225.9 164.3 40.7 58.1
p 2023 700.3 525.8 252.6 218.7 22.3 174.5 20.0 57.7 42.2 256.6 443.7 286.5 226.5 157.2 39.1 55.2
2022 H1 695.3 525.7 256.7 212.5 24.8 169.6 18.8 62.2 48.2 244.5 450.8 291.8 231.4 159.0 40.9 53.1
H2 700.9 518.7 251.9 212.5 21.8 182.2 18.5 59.1 57.8 253.5 447.3 283.0 225.9 164.3 40.7 58.1
2023 H1 671.4 505.4 239.2 210.2 24.7 166.0 17.4 52.9 50.7 241.5 429.9 276.2 220.1 153.8 44.6 49.9
pH2 700.3 525.8 252.6 218.7 22.3 174.5 20.0 57.7 42.2 256.6 443.7 286.5 226.5 157.2 39.1 55.2
As a percentage of total assets
2020 100.0 75.6 35.6 32.4 2.6 24.4 2.6 7.9 9.0 30.0 70.0 47.3 35.8 22.7 6.3 7.9
2021 100.0 73.9 35.8 30.0 3.2 26.1 2.7 8.3 8.6 34.5 65.5 43.3 33.6 22.2 5.3 7.9
2022 100.0 74.0 36.0 30.3 3.1 26.0 2.6 8.4 8.3 36.2 63.8 40.4 32.2 23.5 5.8 8.3
p 2023 100.0 75.1 36.1 31.2 3.2 24.9 2.9 8.2 6.0 36.6 63.4 40.9 32.3 22.4 5.6 7.9
2022 H1 100.0 75.6 36.9 30.6 3.6 24.4 2.7 9.0 6.9 35.2 64.8 42.0 33.3 22.9 5.9 7.6
H2 100.0 74.0 36.0 30.3 3.1 26.0 2.6 8.4 8.3 36.2 63.8 40.4 32.2 23.5 5.8 8.3
2023 H1 100.0 75.3 35.6 31.3 3.7 24.7 2.6 7.9 7.6 36.0 64.0 41.1 32.8 22.9 6.6 7.4
pH2 100.0 75.1 36.1 31.2 3.2 24.9 2.9 8.2 6.0 36.6 63.4 40.9 32.3 22.4 5.6 7.9
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Including cash equivalents.  2 Includ-
ing groups in agriculture and forestry.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
74•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
EBITDA  1
as a percentage of revenuesEBIT  2
as a percentage of revenues
Distribution  3 Distribution  3
Revenues EBITDA  1Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartile EBIT  2Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartile
Period € billion  4Annual
per-
centage
change  5€ billion  4Annual
per-
centage
change  5%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  5% % % € billion  4Annual
per-
centage
change  5%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  5% % %
Total
2016 1,624.3 – 0.4 214.4 7.8 13.2 1.0 6.7 11.4 17.9 111.7 9.0 6.9 0.5 2.6 6.7 12.0
2017 1,719.3 5.1 243.4 14.6 14.2 1.2 7.0 11.0 18.0 141.9 33.3 8.3 1.8 2.5 6.8 12.1
6 2018 1,706.8 0.7 232.8 – 0.9 13.6 – 0.2 6.1 10.6 17.8 129.2 – 6.3 7.6 – 0.6 2.1 6.5 11.9
2019 1,764.6 2.6 233.6 0.4 13.2 – 0.3 6.9 12.2 19.2 105.5 – 17.9 6.0 – 1.5 1.6 5.8 11.8
2020 1,632.8 – 8.8 213.6 – 7.7 13.1 0.2 6.5 11.5 17.9 52.1 – 41.0 3.2 – 2.1 – 0.8 4.9 10.5
2021 1,994.7 20.4 297.7 37.7 14.9 1.9 7.8 13.4 19.9 161.5 212.6 8.1 5.0 2.9 8.2 12.2
2022 2,431.3 20.8 324.8 7.8 13.4 – 1.6 6.4 11.8 18.4 170.0 3.5 7.0 – 1.2 1.6 6.6 12.4
p 2023 2,238.3 – 7.7 323.6 0.4 14.5 1.2 6.1 12.2 17.9 170.0 0.9 7.6 0.7 1.8 6.6 11.5
2019 H1 861.3 2.7 112.3 – 4.0 13.0 – 0.9 6.5 11.8 18.6 53.4 – 23.3 6.2 – 2.1 1.5 5.7 11.7
H2 903.7 2.4 121.3 4.8 13.4 0.3 6.6 11.8 20.0 52.0 – 11.4 5.8 – 0.9 0.8 6.1 12.5
2020 H1 744.5 – 14.4 78.2 – 34.1 10.5 – 3.0 4.8 9.9 16.7 7.9 – 88.0 1.1 – 5.3 – 2.1 3.5 8.8
H2 888.4 – 3.3 135.4 17.1 15.2 2.8 7.6 13.2 19.8 44.2 8.6 5.0 0.7 1.7 6.5 11.6
2021 H1 920.0 20.3 151.5 87.2 16.5 5.9 7.4 12.6 19.5 84.5 . 9.2 8.3 2.3 7.8 12.2
H2 1,075.6 20.4 146.4 8.1 13.6 – 1.6 7.9 13.2 20.8 77.0 73.1 7.2 2.2 2.9 7.7 13.4
2022 H1 1,149.7 23.5 161.0 4.8 14.0 – 2.5 6.1 11.5 18.4 84.9 – 1.6 7.4 – 1.9 1.6 6.4 11.8
H2 1,283.3 18.5 163.9 11.0 12.8 – 0.9 5.9 11.6 18.9 85.2 9.1 6.6 – 0.6 1.7 6.7 12.9
2023 H1 1,112.0 – 3.0 172.0 7.8 15.5 1.6 6.4 10.8 17.5 98.1 16.9 8.8 1.5 1.2 6.5 10.8
pH2 1,127.6 – 12.0 151.7 – 6.8 13.5 0.8 6.2 12.5 19.8 71.9 – 15.0 6.4 – 0.2 1.2 7.0 13.0
Groups with a focus on the production sector 7
2016 1,295.9 – 0.8 161.9 6.3 12.5 0.8 6.5 10.6 16.0 84.8 4.2 6.5 0.3 2.8 6.3 10.5
2017 1,395.9 5.5 187.5 16.6 13.4 1.3 7.1 11.0 15.8 112.5 40.6 8.1 2.0 3.2 6.7 10.4
6 2018 1,367.7 1.0 175.7 – 1.5 12.9 – 0.3 6.9 10.7 16.0 100.7 – 7.1 7.4 – 0.6 2.8 6.9 11.4
2019 1,410.9 2.0 168.1 – 4.4 11.9 – 0.8 6.9 11.3 16.6 76.3 – 23.8 5.4 – 1.8 1.4 5.7 10.1
2020 1,285.2 – 9.4 143.6 – 8.6 11.2 0.1 5.7 10.6 16.5 29.1 – 48.1 2.3 – 2.3 – 0.7 4.3 9.8
2021 1,585.8 22.4 208.9 45.9 13.2 2.1 7.9 12.8 17.9 118.6 325.8 7.5 5.4 2.8 7.8 11.1
2022 1,957.4 21.7 222.9 4.7 11.4 – 1.8 6.9 11.3 16.4 116.3 – 4.7 5.9 – 1.6 1.8 6.6 10.7
p 2023 1,784.0 – 8.2 233.7 5.7 13.1 1.7 7.0 11.4 16.1 124.1 7.6 7.0 1.0 2.2 6.6 11.4
2019 H1 689.9 2.4 83.3 – 8.8 12.1 – 1.5 7.1 10.9 16.1 41.9 – 26.8 6.1 – 2.4 1.8 6.0 9.5
H2 721.0 1.7 84.8 0.3 11.8 – 0.2 6.1 10.8 16.9 34.4 – 19.7 4.8 – 1.3 0.6 5.2 11.1
2020 H1 580.6 – 16.0 49.0 – 42.4 8.4 – 3.8 4.4 8.8 14.9 0.2 – 101.7 0.0 – 6.2 – 2.1 3.1 7.8
H2 704.6 – 3.0 94.6 25.4 13.4 3.4 7.0 12.1 18.6 28.9 19.6 4.1 1.1 0.3 6.0 10.4
2021 H1 731.9 24.0 111.2 126.9 15.2 6.9 8.2 12.6 18.6 66.7 . 9.1 9.3 2.9 7.9 12.1
H2 854.2 21.1 97.7 3.8 11.4 – 1.9 7.8 12.3 17.5 51.9 80.8 6.1 2.0 2.6 7.0 11.5
2022 H1 923.4 23.8 110.9 – 2.5 12.0 – 3.3 7.7 11.5 16.3 59.0 – 14.2 6.4 – 2.8 2.3 6.4 10.4
H2 1,035.8 19.9 112.2 13.1 10.8 – 0.7 5.9 10.8 16.7 57.4 7.7 5.5 – 0.6 1.3 6.5 11.4
2023 H1 894.9 – 2.9 129.0 16.7 14.4 2.4 7.1 11.7 16.3 76.7 30.5 8.6 2.2 2.1 6.7 10.7
pH2 890.0 – 13.0 104.9 – 5.0 11.8 1.0 6.5 12.4 17.4 47.5 – 16.0 5.3 – 0.2 1.8 6.6 12.0
Groups with a focus on the services sector
2016 328.4 1.3 52.5 12.8 16.0 1.6 6.8 13.4 25.1 26.9 24.4 8.2 1.5 2.3 8.2 15.3
2017 323.4 3.5 55.9 8.3 17.3 0.8 6.8 11.5 23.0 29.4 11.4 9.1 0.6 2.1 7.2 15.1
6 2018 339.2 – 0.6 57.1 1.3 16.8 0.3 5.5 10.5 24.7 28.5 – 3.5 8.4 – 0.3 1.4 5.8 16.6
2019 353.7 4.8 65.4 15.2 18.5 1.7 6.9 13.7 24.5 29.2 2.8 8.3 – 0.2 2.4 6.2 16.2
2020 347.6 – 6.1 70.0 – 5.4 20.1 0.1 6.9 13.3 22.1 23.0 – 22.1 6.6 – 1.4 – 1.2 6.5 12.2
2021 408.9 13.0 88.8 21.6 21.7 1.6 7.6 15.0 24.0 42.8 79.7 10.5 3.9 3.0 9.2 15.6
2022 473.9 17.4 101.9 15.3 21.5 – 0.4 5.2 13.1 22.8 53.8 26.4 11.3 0.8 1.0 6.9 14.4
p 2023 454.4 – 5.6 89.9 – 11.2 19.8 – 1.3 5.6 12.9 22.2 45.8 – 13.7 10.1 – 1.0 1.6 6.8 12.9
2019 H1 171.4 4.0 29.0 13.1 16.9 1.4 5.7 12.3 24.4 11.6 – 7.5 6.7 – 0.9 0.0 4.9 14.5
H2 182.7 5.5 36.5 16.9 20.0 1.9 7.1 15.1 24.4 17.7 10.9 9.7 0.5 1.8 8.2 16.3
2020 H1 163.9 – 8.1 29.2 – 9.4 17.8 – 0.3 5.6 10.8 21.2 7.7 – 36.4 4.7 – 2.1 – 2.2 4.3 10.9
H2 183.8 – 4.2 40.8 – 2.2 22.2 0.4 8.9 14.7 23.3 15.3 – 12.8 8.3 – 0.9 2.6 7.5 13.3
2021 H1 188.1 7.7 40.3 26.1 21.5 3.1 6.9 12.6 24.5 17.8 119.9 9.5 4.8 0.9 6.9 13.6
H2 221.4 17.9 48.7 18.2 22.0 0.1 9.4 16.5 24.7 25.1 59.1 11.3 3.0 3.8 9.5 17.7
2022 H1 226.3 22.0 50.1 25.3 22.2 0.6 4.6 11.6 20.9 25.9 46.4 11.5 1.9 – 0.5 6.3 13.5
H2 247.6 13.4 51.8 7.0 20.9 – 1.3 5.2 14.1 24.0 27.8 12.1 11.2 – 0.1 2.2 7.5 15.4
2023 H1 217.1 – 3.6 43.1 – 11.8 19.8 – 1.9 4.7 9.6 19.2 21.4 – 14.4 9.9 – 1.3 – 2.2 4.2 12.0
pH2 237.6 – 7.5 46.8 – 10.7 19.7 – 0.7 5.9 14.4 23.3 24.4 – 13.0 10.3 – 0.7 0.9 7.3 16.1
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. In
some cases revised. Excluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Earnings be-
fore interest, taxes, depreciation and amortisation.  2 Earnings before interest and taxes.
3 Quantile data are based on the groups' unweighted return on sales.  4 Annual figuresdo not always match the sum of the two half-year figures. See Quality report on con-
solidated financial statement statistics, p. 3.  5 Adjusted for substantial changes in the
basis of consolidation of large groups and in the reporting sample. See Quality report
on consolidated financial statement statistics, p. 6.  6 From 2018 onwards: significant
changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with previous periods.  7 Including
groups in agriculture and forestry.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
75•
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
€ million
2023 2024 2024
Item 2021 2022 2023 Q3  Q4  Q1  January  r February  r March  p
I.Current Account +338,219 –79,013 +239,797 +95,529 +88,372 +100,208 +24,557 +31,118 +44,533
1.Goods
Receipts 2,508,880 2,964,557 2,887,952 703,106 722,459 737,852 236,366 244,881 256,605
Expenditure  2,229,584 3,040,476 2,642,121 632,172 647,934 625,253 205,521 204,672 215,060
Balance +279,297 –75,919 +245,831 +70,934 +74,525 +112,599 +30,844 +40,210 +41,545
2.Services
Receipts 1,036,544 1,264,680 1,305,708 341,692 341,383 314,444 106,175 102,542 105,727
Expenditure  933,473 1,116,765 1,183,168 293,046 321,843 306,035 103,821 100,431 101,783
Balance +103,071 +147,915 +122,541 +48,647 +19,540 + 8,409 + 2,355 + 2,110 + 3,944
3.Primary income
Receipts 876,353 986,821 1,204,271 306,425 307,142 303,420 99,362 98,182 105,876
Expenditure  762,197 972,065 1,176,125 289,394 274,605 286,295 96,892 95,495 93,907
Balance +114,157 +14,757 +28,146 +17,032 +32,538 +17,126 + 2,470 + 2,687 +11,969
4.Secondary income
Receipts 160,447 167,687 176,488 38,656 49,751 42,079 13,678 13,761 14,640
Expenditure  318,753 333,454 333,208 79,740 87,982 80,005 24,790 27,650 27,564
Balance –158,305 –165,766 –156,720 –41,083 –38,231 –37,926 –11,112 –13,889 –12,924
II.Capital account +48,574 +150,194 +37,430 +10,568 +20,957 + 3,711 – 4,237 + 1,756 + 6,192
III.Financial account  1 +383,257 +84,296 +266,632 +95,363 +97,803 +78,538 + 5,531 + 8,474 +64,533
1.Direct investment +393,811 +294,547 +25,989 + 8,808 – 9,916 +44,936 + 3,026 +31,811 +10,098
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  +357,799 + 1,078 –364,655 + 8,323 –321,468 +58,484 – 5,262 +33,984 +29,762
By non-resident units of
the euro area  –36,012 –293,468 –390,645 – 485 –311,552 +13,549 – 8,288 + 2,173 +19,664
2.Portfolio investment +289,671 –296,972 –84,523 –18,154 –51,211 –68,493 –68,312 –11,190 +11,009
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  +776,525 –233,682 +417,033 +96,468 +41,930 +131,408 +55,124 +45,430 +30,854
Equity and
investment fund shares +357,324 –188,053 +50,812 – 3,893 – 7,523 + 8,378 +28,410 –14,966 – 5,066
Short-term
debt securities  +118,619 –110,528 +94,070 +32,093 +37,521 +13,117 – 8,030 + 9,620 +11,527
Long-term
debt securities  +300,582 +64,898 +272,150 +68,268 +11,932 +109,914 +34,743 +50,777 +24,393
By non-resident units of 
the euro area  +486,854 +63,290 +501,556 +114,622 +93,141 +199,901 +123,436 +56,620 +19,845
Equity and
investment fund shares +639,059 +33,429 +161,854 +29,019 +96,290 +37,524 +35,830 +12,416 –10,722
Short-term
debt securities  +36,734 –66,091 –19,876 +19,398 –32,558 –35,574 – 786 –22,749 –12,040
Long-term
debt securities  –188,939 +95,952 +359,579 +66,205 +29,408 +197,951 +88,392 +66,953 +42,606
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options +53,746 +77,203 +21,403 – 2,669 +23,592 +23,780 +15,574 +13,787 – 5,582
4.Other investment –484,342 – 8,410 +316,164 +109,533 +128,941 +77,140 +54,416 –26,801 +49,526
Eurosystem –444,017 +172,802 +318,652 +55,538 +17,847 +79,567 +76,996 –25,543 +28,113
General government –81,211 –50,106 – 1,304 – 2,414 – 9,640 + 3,746 + 1,977 – 1,436 + 3,205
MFIs  2 –130,343 –282,828 +112,497 +39,958 +141,020 +30,471 +24,475 –10,319 +16,315
Enterprises and households +171,229 +151,722 –113,680 +16,451 –20,287 –36,644 –49,032 +10,496 + 1,892
5.Reserve assets +130,370 +17,929 –12,401 – 2,155 + 6,396 + 1,176 + 826 + 867 – 518
IV.Net errors and omissions – 3,537 +13,115 –10,595 –10,734 –11,526 –25,381 –14,789 –24,400 +13,808
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Increase: + / decrease: -.2 Excluding the Eurosystem.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
76•
XII. External sector
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Current Account Financial account  3
Goods 
Zeit Total Totalof which: 
Supplementary
trade items  1 ServicesPrimary
incomeSecondary
incomeBalance of
capital
account  2 Totalof which: 
Reserve
assetsErrors
and
omissions  4
2009 + 142,744 + 140,626 – 6,605 – 17,642 + 54,524 – 34,764 – 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 – 11,194
2010 + 147,298 + 160,829 – 6,209 – 25,255 + 51,306 – 39,582 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 – 55,760
2011 + 167,340 + 162,970 – 9,357 – 29,930 + 69,087 – 34,787 + 419 + 120,857 + 2,836 – 46,902
2012 + 195,712 + 199,531 – 11,388 – 30,774 + 65,658 – 38,703 – 413 + 151,417 + 1,297 – 43,882
2013 + 184,352 + 203,802 – 12,523 – 39,321 + 63,284 – 43,413 – 563 + 226,014 + 838 + 42,224
2014 + 211,477 + 219,629 – 14,296 – 25,303 + 58,646 – 41,495 + 3,255 + 230,931 – 2,564 + 16,200
2015 + 259,781 + 248,394 – 15,405 – 18,516 + 69,324 – 39,420 + 265 + 237,733 – 2,213 – 22,313
2016 + 270,200 + 252,409 – 19,921 – 20,987 + 77,258 – 38,480 + 2,451 + 258,906 + 1,686 – 13,744
2017 + 255,964 + 255,077 – 13,613 – 23,994 + 77,046 – 52,165 – 2,653 + 268,306 – 1,269 + 14,996
2018 + 267,609 + 221,983 – 22,985 – 15,806 + 112,389 – 50,958 + 914 + 242,889 + 392 – 25,634
2019 + 283,849 + 219,548 – 32,263 – 13,553 + 128,602 – 50,747 – 3,705 + 200,312 – 544 – 79,832
2020 + 222,507 + 182,725 – 16,381 + 6,634 + 86,037 – 52,889 – 10,345 + 168,767 – 51 – 43,395
2021 + 263,454 + 196,491 + 2,541 + 1,615 + 123,181 – 57,832 – 2,593 + 208,978 + 31,892 – 51,883
2022 + 164,630 + 125,916 + 9,742 – 37,289 + 142,094 – 66,091 – 21,644 + 198,190 + 4,426 + 55,204
r 2023 + 257,705 + 241,414 – 13,973 – 62,994 + 143,901 – 64,616 – 27,252 + 239,737 + 884 + 9,284
2021 Q2 + 64,457 + 49,623 + 659 + 6,593 + 16,972 – 8,731 – 2,375 + 72,773 + 58 + 10,691
Q3 + 61,257 + 50,021 – 75 – 6,609 + 33,320 – 15,474 + 2,074 + 16,358 + 31,199 – 46,973
Q4 + 62,145 + 38,842 + 1,567 – 2,897 + 42,462 – 16,263 – 378 + 52,941 + 250 – 8,825
2022 Q1 + 58,486 + 37,406 + 5,570 + 406 + 37,066 – 16,392 – 3,462 + 72,054 + 2,200 + 17,029
Q2 + 27,439 + 29,673 + 7,848 – 6,775 + 17,726 – 13,185 – 4,694 + 60,417 + 597 + 37,672
Q3 + 22,413 + 23,635 – 610 – 22,705 + 38,696 – 17,213 – 6,692 – 19,845 + 784 – 35,567
Q4 + 56,291 + 35,201 – 3,067 – 8,215 + 48,606 – 19,300 – 6,797 + 85,565 + 845 + 36,070
r 2023 Q1 + 68,626 + 60,219 – 2,339 – 10,046 + 38,191 – 19,737 – 13,018 + 82,418 + 224 + 26,809
r Q2 + 49,603 + 58,897 – 2,642 – 17,562 + 18,342 – 10,075 – 4,058 + 30,548 + 1,096 – 14,996
r Q3 + 68,343 + 65,909 – 1,436 – 23,372 + 41,198 – 15,393 – 3,974 + 28,266 – 790 – 36,102
r Q4 + 71,133 + 56,390 – 7,557 – 12,013 + 46,169 – 19,412 – 6,202 + 98,505 + 355 + 33,574
r 2024 Q1 + 83,599 + 77,824 – 3,323 – 12,544 + 37,353 – 19,034 – 8,155 + 48,208 + 378 – 27,236
2021 Nov. + 20,513 + 14,469 + 410 – 100 + 12,141 – 5,997 – 1,157 + 23,859 + 963 + 4,504
Dec. + 25,098 + 9,154 + 336 + 2,151 + 18,589 – 4,796 + 224 + 15,623 – 974 – 9,699
2022 Jan. + 15,642 + 7,408 + 1,263 + 752 + 13,109 – 5,627 – 1,107 + 27,312 + 309 + 12,777
Feb. + 22,460 + 16,318 + 2,037 + 1,099 + 10,568 – 5,525 – 1,629 + 46,824 + 1,161 + 25,992
Mar. + 20,385 + 13,680 + 2,270 – 1,444 + 13,390 – 5,241 – 726 – 2,083 + 730 – 21,741
Apr. + 11,194 + 6,514 + 2,803 – 1,383 + 11,442 – 5,378 – 1,551 + 19,026 + 83 + 9,383
May + 4,457 + 11,167 + 4,080 – 2,254 – 3,089 – 1,368 – 2,634 + 1,842 + 161 + 19
June + 11,788 + 11,993 + 965 – 3,138 + 9,373 – 6,439 – 509 + 39,549 + 353 + 28,270
July + 8,077 + 9,085 + 370 – 6,153 + 11,982 – 6,837 – 3,180 – 21,413 – 484 – 26,310
Aug. + 1,341 + 3,251 – 694 – 9,755 + 13,728 – 5,883 – 1,234 + 23,390 + 81 + 23,283
Sep. + 12,995 + 11,299 – 286 – 6,797 + 12,986 – 4,493 – 2,278 – 21,822 + 1,187 – 32,540
Oct. + 8,848 + 7,014 – 407 – 5,801 + 13,094 – 5,460 – 2,335 + 41,713 + 672 + 35,200
Nov. + 20,907 + 15,339 – 667 – 2,284 + 13,933 – 6,081 – 2,429 – 4,927 + 425 – 23,406
Dec. + 26,536 + 12,847 – 1,993 – 131 + 21,578 – 7,759 – 2,032 + 48,780 – 252 + 24,276
r 2023 Jan. + 18,821 + 13,395 + 206 – 2,113 + 12,999 – 5,458 – 6,283 – 3,003 – 341 – 15,541
r Feb. + 22,557 + 20,302 – 525 – 3,355 + 11,025 – 5,415 – 984 + 29,913 + 143 + 8,340
r Mar. + 27,248 + 26,522 – 2,020 – 4,578 + 14,168 – 8,864 – 5,751 + 55,507 + 423 + 34,010
r Apr. + 20,231 + 17,355 – 150 – 4,055 + 12,006 – 5,076 – 476 – 31,839 + 88 – 51,594
r May + 6,463 + 17,384 – 801 – 6,619 – 3,922 – 380 – 2,355 + 5,358 + 45 + 1,250
r June + 22,909 + 24,158 – 1,691 – 6,888 + 10,258 – 4,619 – 1,228 + 57,030 + 962 + 35,348
r July + 19,428 + 21,123 – 1,987 – 7,757 + 11,961 – 5,899 – 4,836 + 2,756 – 118 – 11,837
r Aug. + 21,748 + 21,168 + 1,278 – 9,908 + 15,479 – 4,991 – 598 + 20,292 – 107 – 858
r Sep. + 27,166 + 23,618 – 726 – 5,708 + 13,759 – 4,503 + 1,460 + 5,219 – 566 – 23,407
r Oct. + 9,905 + 13,404 – 826 – 9,458 + 12,509 – 6,550 – 4,081 + 24,465 + 858 + 18,641
r Nov. + 29,200 + 25,082 – 3,607 – 2,826 + 13,543 – 6,600 – 4,497 + 36,655 + 65 + 11,952
r Dec. + 32,029 + 17,904 – 3,124 + 271 + 20,117 – 6,262 + 2,375 + 37,385 – 569 + 2,980
r 2024 Jan. + 27,112 + 23,461 – 1,412 – 4,346 + 12,404 – 4,407 – 7,057 + 8,040 – 249 – 12,015
r Feb. + 28,772 + 27,105 – 1,009 – 3,764 + 10,266 – 4,834 – 1,597 + 7,039 + 1,193 – 20,136
r Mar. + 27,715 + 27,258 – 902 – 4,434 + 14,683 – 9,793 + 499 + 33,129 – 566 + 4,915
p Apr. + 25,854 + 25,405 – 524 – 5,603 + 9,645 – 3,593 – 2,243 + 5,529 – 317 – 18,081
1 For example, warehouse transactions for the account of residents, deductions of
goods returned and deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for
processing.  2 Including net acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets.3 Net lending: + / net borrowing: -.  4 Statistical errors and omissions resulting from the
difference between the balance on the financial account and the balances on the
current account and the capital account.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
77•
XII. External sector
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
€ million
2023 2024
Group of countries/country 
2021 2022 
2023 Nov. Dec. Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr.
All countries  1 Exports 1,379,346 1,594,034 1,590,024 141,682 115,176 130,779 133,946 137,120 140,729
Imports 1,204,050 1,505,434 1,365,783 118,167 97,934 108,765 109,311 113,236 117,151
Balance +175,296 +88,600 +224,241 +23,516 +17,241 +22,014 +24,635 +23,884 +23,578
   I. European countries Exports 949,744 1,091,554 1,087,492 97,848 76,910 92,762 92,338 94,269 96,248
Imports 803,687 973,063 881,705 77,163 62,035 71,804 72,616 73,505 76,355
Balance +146,057 +118,492 +205,787 +20,686 +14,875 +20,958 +19,722 +20,765 +19,892
      1. EU Member States (27) Exports 751,322 878,642 874,621 77,507 61,331 75,069 74,142 75,886 76,794
Imports 638,064 737,668 719,511 62,843 50,439 58,560 58,859 60,452 62,775
Balance +113,259 +140,974 +155,110 +14,664 +10,892 +16,508 +15,283 +15,435 +14,019
          Euro area (20)       Exports 525,992 617,068 614,669 54,152 43,318 52,469 51,938 52,762 53,870
          countries Imports 440,248 506,865 480,164 41,357 33,994 38,712 38,850 40,213 41,692
Balance +85,744 +110,203 +134,505 +12,794 + 9,324 +13,756 +13,088 +12,548 +12,178
          of which:
               Austria Exports 72,385 90,270 81,985 7,054 5,603 6,817 6,709 6,932 6,982
  Imports 47,492 58,137 54,611 4,741 3,840 4,199 4,415 4,504 4,761
Balance +24,893 +32,134 +27,374 + 2,313 + 1,763 + 2,617 + 2,294 + 2,428 + 2,221
               Belgium and Exports 58,080 70,933 69,243 5,769 4,914 5,719 5,756 5,883 5,970
               Luxembourg Imports 55,726 67,071 56,920 4,960 3,833 4,242 4,258 4,602 4,730
Balance + 2,354 + 3,861 +12,323 + 809 + 1,081 + 1,477 + 1,498 + 1,281 + 1,241
               France Exports 102,741 118,168 120,225 10,601 8,793 10,668 10,738 10,430 11,252
  Imports 61,921 69,969 69,786 6,185 5,199 5,888 5,984 5,874 5,976
Balance +40,820 +48,198 +50,440 + 4,417 + 3,594 + 4,780 + 4,754 + 4,556 + 5,276
               Italy Exports 75,526 89,191 87,198 7,849 6,012 7,450 7,235 7,465 7,099
  Imports 65,389 73,177 72,172 6,299 4,979 5,742 5,912 5,989 5,983
Balance +10,137 +16,014 +15,027 + 1,550 + 1,034 + 1,708 + 1,323 + 1,476 + 1,116
               Netherlands Exports 101,050 112,261 115,358 10,044 8,367 9,677 9,401 10,064 10,150
  Imports 105,113 114,998 104,896 8,459 7,979 8,693 8,104 8,666 8,870
Balance – 4,063 – 2,737 +10,462 + 1,585 + 387 + 984 + 1,298 + 1,398 + 1,280
               Spain  Exports 43,932 49,935 54,506 5,205 3,718 4,857 4,747 4,678 4,815
  Imports 34,180 37,756 39,227 3,621 3,062 3,187 3,295 3,426 3,697
Balance + 9,752 +12,178 +15,279 + 1,585 + 656 + 1,670 + 1,452 + 1,252 + 1,118
          Other EU Member  Exports 225,331 261,574 259,952 23,355 18,013 22,600 22,204 23,125 22,924
          States  Imports 197,815 230,803 239,347 21,486 16,445 19,848 20,009 20,239 21,083
Balance +27,515 +30,772 +20,605 + 1,869 + 1,568 + 2,752 + 2,194 + 2,886 + 1,841
      2. Other European Exports 198,421 212,912 212,870 20,341 15,579 17,694 18,196 18,383 19,454
          countries Imports 165,623 235,395 162,194 14,320 11,596 13,244 13,757 13,053 13,580
Balance +32,798 –22,483 +50,676 + 6,022 + 3,983 + 4,450 + 4,439 + 5,330 + 5,873
          of which:
               Switzerland Exports 60,638 70,611 66,570 6,103 4,623 5,811 5,680 5,963 6,440
  Imports 49,247 55,723 51,823 5,119 3,653 4,262 4,603 4,670 4,502
Balance +11,391 +14,888 +14,747 + 984 + 970 + 1,549 + 1,077 + 1,293 + 1,938
               United Kingdom Exports 65,002 73,764 78,458 8,167 6,049 6,806 6,863 6,907 7,432
  Imports 32,245 40,314 36,680 3,081 2,442 3,187 3,101 2,938 3,113
Balance +32,757 +33,449 +41,778 + 5,085 + 3,607 + 3,619 + 3,762 + 3,969 + 4,319
   II. Non-European  Exports 427,430 497,428 497,700 43,442 37,931 37,670 41,264 42,486 44,047
       countries Imports 399,604 531,409 482,699 40,873 35,760 36,821 36,525 39,532 40,573
Balance +27,827 –33,982 +15,000 + 2,569 + 2,171 + 849 + 4,738 + 2,954 + 3,473
       1. Africa Exports 23,068 26,462 28,736 2,293 2,656 2,177 2,148 2,171 2,275
Imports 26,241 34,213 32,806 2,865 2,567 2,729 2,375 2,800 2,838
Balance – 3,173 – 7,751 – 4,070 – 573 + 88 – 552 – 227 – 629 – 563
       2. America Exports 167,735 210,652 216,556 19,239 15,812 16,297 18,538 19,396 20,282
  Imports 101,525 131,979 130,538 11,399 10,620 11,069 10,189 11,239 11,361
Balance +66,210 +78,673 +86,019 + 7,840 + 5,193 + 5,228 + 8,349 + 8,157 + 8,921
           of which:
               United States  Exports 121,980 156,208 157,950 14,188 11,385 11,930 13,844 14,452 14,563
  Imports 72,316 93,338 94,676 8,342 7,700 7,954 7,268 7,867 8,087
Balance +49,664 +62,871 +63,274 + 5,846 + 3,685 + 3,975 + 6,576 + 6,586 + 6,476
       3. Asia Exports 224,897 246,289 238,649 20,625 18,333 18,245 19,387 19,866 20,375
  Imports 267,604 357,702 313,166 26,257 22,047 22,642 23,473 25,100 25,964
Balance –42,707 –111,413 –74,518 – 5,632 – 3,714 – 4,398 – 4,086 – 5,234 – 5,588
           of which:
               Middle East  Exports 26,090 29,648 32,047 3,032 2,669 2,465 2,698 2,674 2,719
  Imports 7,509 13,304 15,858 1,037 807 646 634 1,005 1,274
Balance +18,582 +16,344 +16,188 + 1,995 + 1,862 + 1,819 + 2,064 + 1,669 + 1,445
               Japan  Exports 18,245 20,511 20,240 1,671 1,527 1,819 1,760 1,595 1,514
Imports 23,477 25,413 25,644 2,079 1,770 1,946 1,953 2,050 2,085
Balance – 5,232 – 4,902 – 5,404 – 408 – 243 – 127 – 193 – 455 – 571
               People's Republic  Exports 103,564 106,762 97,328 8,562 7,242 7,645 7,934 8,439 8,767
               of China  2 Imports 142,964 192,830 157,163 14,099 11,430 11,458 11,988 12,641 12,673
Balance –39,400 –86,068 –59,836 – 5,537 – 4,187 – 3,813 – 4,055 – 4,202 – 3,906
               New industrial countries Exports 55,295 63,344 60,925 5,151 4,763 4,492 4,808 5,025 5,181
               and emerging markets  Imports 55,441 71,012 66,527 5,214 4,593 4,738 4,946 5,067 5,315
               of Asia  3 Balance – 146 – 7,668 – 5,602 – 63 + 170 – 246 – 138 – 42 – 134
       4. Oceania and Exports 11,731 14,024 13,759 1,285 1,131 951 1,191 1,052 1,115
           polar regions Imports 4,233 7,515 6,190 351 526 381 488 392 411
Balance + 7,497 + 6,510 + 7,569 + 934 + 604 + 570 + 703 + 660 + 704
* Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, Imports
(c.i.f.) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to
the current position. Euro area incl. Croatia.  1 Including fuel and other supplies forships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region.  2 Excluding Hong Kong.
3 Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea,
Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
78•
XII. External sector
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Services  Primary income
of which: 
Zeit Total Transport Travel  1Financial
servicesCharges for
the use of
intellectual
propertyTelecommuni-
cations-, 
computer and
information
servicesOther
business
servicesGouvernment
goods and
services  2Compensation
of employeesInvestment
incomeOther
primary
income  3
2019 – 13,553 + 3,607 – 45,947 + 10,755 + 18,368 – 9,763 – 2,948 + 3,489 + 492 +128,990 – 880
2020 + 6,634 – 5,392 – 14,678 + 9,696 + 18,149 – 7,941 – 4,483 + 2,920 + 4,422 + 83,747 – 2,133
2021 + 1,615 – 6,717 – 24,323 + 8,280 + 31,784 – 9,449 – 9,922 + 3,058 + 3,744 +122,198 – 2,762
2022 – 37,289 – 11,246 – 54,946 + 8,910 + 29,373 – 12,432 – 10,206 + 3,617 + 4,093 +143,330 – 5,330
2023 – 62,994 – 9,907 – 68,937 + 9,206 + 21,219 – 11,931 – 14,316 + 3,345 + 4,079 +144,527 – 4,706
2022 Q3 – 22,705 – 3,706 – 22,506 + 2,084 + 5,742 – 3,735 – 3,897 + 984 + 226 + 40,032 – 1,561
Q4 – 8,215 – 2,447 – 13,323 + 2,600 + 5,965 – 2,300 – 1,776 + 739 + 1,184 + 44,713 + 2,709
2023 Q1 – 10,046 – 3,012 – 11,374 + 1,927 + 5,683 – 4,044 – 3,185 + 1,037 + 1,769 + 38,089 – 1,668
Q2 – 17,562 – 1,729 – 18,332 + 2,390 + 4,679 – 2,580 – 4,601 + 873 + 911 + 21,388 – 3,957
Q3 – 23,372 – 2,514 – 23,333 + 2,572 + 4,893 – 3,568 – 4,389 + 805 + 205 + 42,403 – 1,409
Q4 – 12,013 – 2,651 – 15,899 + 2,318 + 5,965 – 1,740 – 2,142 + 630 + 1,194 + 42,647 + 2,328
2024 Q1 – 12,544 – 1,972 – 12,612 + 2,659 + 4,846 – 3,777 – 4,363 + 949 + 1,747 + 36,356 – 749
2023 June – 6,888 – 616 – 7,952 + 954 + 1,072 + 157 – 1,499 + 325 + 301 + 13,041 – 3,084
July – 7,757 – 586 – 6,504 + 797 + 1,052 – 1,644 – 1,598 + 200 + 69 + 12,328 – 436
Aug. – 9,908 – 1,022 – 8,691 + 962 + 796 – 1,137 – 1,693 + 298 + 65 + 15,920 – 506
Sep. – 5,708 – 906 – 8,138 + 813 + 3,045 – 787 – 1,097 + 306 + 70 + 14,155 – 467
Oct. – 9,458 – 1,149 – 9,567 + 451 + 2,239 – 1,433 – 797 + 329 + 353 + 12,659 – 503
Nov. – 2,826 – 741 – 3,771 + 805 + 2,177 – 450 – 1,436 + 149 + 345 + 13,523 – 325
Dec. + 271 – 761 – 2,561 + 1,061 + 1,549 + 143 + 91 + 152 + 496 + 16,465 + 3,156
2024 Jan. – 4,346 – 556 – 3,613 + 827 + 1,492 – 1,648 – 1,850 + 349 + 577 + 12,265 – 438
Feb. – 3,764 – 387 – 3,884 + 720 + 1,228 – 1,269 – 933 + 296 + 586 + 10,047 – 368
r Mar. – 4,434 – 1,029 – 5,115 + 1,112 + 2,126 – 860 – 1,580 + 304 + 584 + 14,044 + 56
p Apr. – 5,603 – 328 – 5,214 + 786 + 2,117 – 1,672 – 2,065 + 303 + 300 + 9,759 – 414
1 Since 2001 the sample results of a household survey have been used on the
expenditure side.  2 Domestic public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on
services, not included elsewhere; including the receipts from foreign military bases.3 Includes, inter alia, taxes on leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU as
well as subsidies received from the EU.
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Secondary income Capital account
General government All sectors excluding general government  2
of which:  of which: 
Zeit Total TotalCurrent
international
cooperation  1Current
taxes on
income, wealth,
etc. TotalPersonal transfers
between
resident and
non-resident
households  3of which: 
Workers’
remittances TotalNon-produced
non-financial
assetsCapital
transfers
2019 – 50,747 – 30,251 – 11,473 + 11,591 – 20,496 .– 5,431 – 3,705 – 298 – 3,407
2020 – 52,889 – 34,755 – 12,175 + 10,767 – 18,134 – 5,920 – 5,908 – 10,345 – 3,547 – 6,799
2021 – 57,832 – 35,627 – 9,927 + 11,886 – 22,205 – 6,178 – 6,170 – 2,593 – 565 – 2,028
2022 – 66,091 – 40,174 – 16,147 + 14,051 – 25,917 – 8,028 – 7,149 – 21,644 – 15,993 – 5,652
2023 – 64,616 – 36,933 – 15,557 + 14,302 – 27,683 – 7,418 – 6,805 – 27,252 – 19,116 – 8,136
2022 Q3 – 17,213 – 11,247 – 3,569 + 2,137 – 5,966 – 1,837 – 1,810 – 6,692 – 4,955 – 1,737
Q4 – 19,300 – 12,801 – 6,976 + 2,089 – 6,499 – 1,844 – 1,810 – 6,797 – 4,390 – 2,407
2023 Q1 – 19,737 – 10,976 – 4,301 + 2,404 – 8,761 – 1,882 – 1,731 – 13,018 – 10,626 – 2,392
Q2 – 10,075 – 3,809 – 2,117 + 7,721 – 6,265 – 1,846 – 1,691 – 4,058 – 3,071 – 987
Q3 – 15,393 – 9,533 – 3,111 + 2,062 – 5,860 – 1,844 – 1,691 – 3,974 – 2,270 – 1,703
Q4 – 19,412 – 12,615 – 6,029 + 2,115 – 6,797 – 1,846 – 1,691 – 6,202 – 3,149 – 3,053
2024 Q1 – 19,034 – 7,180 – 1,672 + 2,775 – 11,854 – 1,935 – 1,933 – 8,155 – 6,849 – 1,307
2023 June – 4,619 – 2,507 – 690 + 1,263 – 2,112 – 615 – 564 – 1,228 – 783 – 445
July – 5,899 – 3,861 – 1,293 + 543 – 2,038 – 615 – 564 – 4,836 – 3,670 – 1,166
Aug. – 4,991 – 3,161 – 1,057 + 389 – 1,830 – 614 – 564 – 598 – 439 – 159
Sep. – 4,503 – 2,511 – 761 + 1,130 – 1,992 – 615 – 564 + 1,460 + 1,839 – 378
Oct. – 6,550 – 4,423 – 1,562 + 399 – 2,127 – 611 – 560 – 4,081 – 3,423 – 657
Nov. – 6,600 – 4,444 – 1,718 + 453 – 2,155 – 612 – 560 – 4,497 – 3,416 – 1,081
Dec. – 6,262 – 3,748 – 2,748 + 1,262 – 2,515 – 623 – 571 + 2,375 + 3,691 – 1,315
2024 Jan. – 4,407 – 2,250 – 709 + 534 – 2,157 – 645 – 644 – 7,057 – 5,390 – 1,667
Feb. – 4,834 – 2,461 – 667 + 1,122 – 2,374 – 645 – 644 – 1,597 – 1,858 + 261
r Mar. – 9,793 – 2,469 – 296 + 1,119 – 7,324 – 644 – 644 + 499 + 400 + 99
p Apr. – 3,593 – 1,518 – 427 + 1,356 – 2,075 – 646 – 644 – 2,243 – 2,927 + 684
1 Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international
cooperation and other current transfers.  2 Includes insurance premiums and claims(excluding life insurance policies).  3 Transfers between resident and non-resident
households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
79•
XII. External sector
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany (net)
€ million
2023 2024 2024
Item 2021 2022 2023  r Q3 r Q4 r Q1 r February  r March  r March  p
I.Net domestic investment abroad
 (increase: +) +801,268 +322,457 +267,197 +24,562 +118,505 +176,302 +121,366 +32,291 +21,834
1.Direct investment +167,477 +170,303 +74,679 – 9,713 +44,069 +27,451 + 6,163 +19,399 +12,357
Equity +107,462 +104,545 +62,650 +11,722 +15,003 +20,776 + 7,017 + 1,654 +11,958
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 +45,048 +57,927 +46,188 +16,123 + 8,766 +21,056 + 8,291 + 8,272 + 9,727
Debt instruments +60,014 +65,758 +12,030 –21,434 +29,066 + 6,675 – 854 +17,745 + 399
2.Portfolio investment +178,741 + 9,165 +149,308 +11,882 +18,941 +61,661 + 9,415 +33,778 + 1,766
Shares  2 +46,651 –15,337 – 5,273 – 5,128 + 637 + 4– 1,364 + 1,474 + 178
Investment fund shares  3 +122,885 +29,718 +23,457 + 6,240 + 2,741 +21,543 + 3,209 + 4,902 + 4,953
Short-term  4
debt securities – 98 +16,199 + 9,292 + 3,105 + 3,059 + 6,578 + 1,468 + 1,913 + 2,992
Long-term   5
debt securities + 9,303 –21,415 +121,832 + 7,665 +12,504 +33,536 + 6,101 +25,489 – 6,359
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options  6 +47,880 +41,519 +39,966 +12,714 – 344 + 6,439 + 5,415 – 1,495 + 5,471
4.Other investment  7 +375,278 +97,044 + 2,359 +10,469 +55,484 +80,373 +99,180 –18,824 + 2,557
MFIs  8 +112,904 +59,472 +42,150 +20,168 –20,784 +98,981 +51,232 – 3,161 +10,647
Short-term +99,380 +34,961 +16,508 + 2,381 –35,986 +94,149 +47,129 – 3,636 + 9,104
Long-term +13,204 +24,473 +25,575 +17,766 +15,204 + 4,861 + 4,123 + 485 + 1,538
Enterprises and
households  9 +147,223 +48,475 +125,919 +16,590 +19,110 +19,441 +13,037 – 4,102 +11,447
Short-term +114,647 +24,730 +107,673 +11,913 +15,696 +15,043 +12,381 – 6,804 + 9,462
Long-term –13,302 – 7,670 + 1,130 + 1,358 – 1,596 – 378 – 129 + 321 + 160
General government – 8,243 –25,070 + 6,629 – 3,450 + 3,373 – 3,312 + 158 – 1,540 – 100
Short-term – 7,256 –23,472 + 2,165 – 3,304 + 4,091 – 3,095 + 312 – 1,471 – 21
Long-term – 978 – 1,593 + 4,449 – 145 – 718 – 216 – 154 – 69 – 78
Bundesbank +123,394 +14,167 –172,339 –22,840 +53,785 –34,737 +34,754 –10,020 –19,437
5.Reserve assets +31,892 + 4,426 + 884 – 790 + 355 + 378 + 1,193 – 566 – 317
II.Net foreign investment in the
reporting country (increase: +) +592,289 +124,267 +27,460 – 3,705 +20,000 +128,094 +114,327 – 838 +16,305
1.Direct investment +85,983 +58,137 +14,975 –14,410 +16,119 +15,044 + 6,686 + 3,605 + 4,860
Equity +46,474 +22,102 +24,920 – 2,525 + 6,251 +16,228 + 3,325 + 3,102 + 371
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 + 8,359 +10,299 + 2,668 + 753 + 2,010 + 5,133 + 2,207 + 614 – 1,012
Debt instruments +39,509 +36,035 – 9,945 –11,885 + 9,868 – 1,184 + 3,361 + 503 + 4,489
2.Portfolio investment –18,451 – 1,568 +148,156 +62,206 – 196 +58,313 +14,721 +21,385 + 3,169
Shares  2 + 2,615 – 5,807 –12,984 – 1,351 – 47 – 4,197 – 230 – 2,080 – 2,221
Investment fund shares  3 – 8,423 – 3,207 – 1,984 – 1,583 – 232 – 467 – 521 + 352 + 941
Short-term  4
debt securities +30,545 –32,717 + 3,936 – 2,131 – 6,138 –20,838 – 8,967 + 5,759 –24,250
Long-term   5
debt securities –43,188 +40,163 +159,188 +67,271 + 6,221 +83,815 +24,438 +17,354 +28,699
3.Other investment  7 +524,758 +67,698 –135,671 –51,501 + 4,077 +54,737 +92,921 –25,828 + 8,275
MFIs  8 +161,287 +153,003 –55,282 –35,891 –93,935 +139,975 +62,969 – 2,075 – 3,504
Short-term +115,265 +160,861 –88,243 –50,804 –88,073 +140,506 +59,678 + 8,700 – 9,981
Long-term +46,044 – 7,860 +32,959 +14,912 – 5,863 – 526 + 3,296 –10,776 + 6,476
Enterprises and
households  9 +141,138 +11,086 +58,576 –13,249 +35,026 +26,282 +19,089 –13,462 +25,065
Short-term +99,842 – 8,533 +31,822 –18,460 +32,264 +17,220 +17,453 –16,039 +23,633
Long-term +14,022 + 8,384 +16,865 + 2,788 + 238 + 6,124 + 670 + 1,616 + 470
General government – 4,463 – 5,674 – 717 + 2,898 – 4,126 + 2,314 + 1,135 + 2,886 – 717
Short-term – 2,134 – 3,293 – 1,066 + 2,790 – 4,554 + 2,346 + 1,187 + 2,901 – 498
Long-term – 2,326 – 2,379 + 540 + 299 + 428 – 31 – 53 – 15 – 219
Bundesbank +226,796 –90,717 –138,249 – 5,260 +67,112 –113,835 + 9,729 –13,177 –12,569
III.Net financial account 
(net lending: +/net borrowing: -) +208,978 +198,190 +239,737 +28,266 +98,505 +48,208 + 7,039 +33,129 + 5,529
1 Estimated on the basis of the figures on the level of direct investment stocks abroad
and in the Federal Republic of Germany (see Statistical series, direct investment
statistics).  2 Including participation certificates.  3 Including reinvestment of earnings.
4 Short-term: original maturity up to one year.  5 Up to and including 2012 without
accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited.6 Balance of transactions arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as
employee stock options.  7 Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency
and deposits.  8 Excluding Bundesbank.  9 Includes the following sectors: financial
corporations (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financial
corporations, households and non-profit institutions serving households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
80•
XII. External sector
7. External position of the Bundesbank *
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
End of
reporting
period Total TotalGold
and gold
receivablesSpecial
drawing
rightsReserve
position in
the IMFCurrency,
deposits and
securities Totalof which: 
Clearing
accounts
within the
ESCB  1Portfolio
investment  2External
liabilities  3 4Net
external
position  5
6 1999 Jan. 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 – – 9,628 85,688
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 – 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,891
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 – 30,308
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,923
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 – 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,454
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,932
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,003
2013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,921
2016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,723 397,727
2017 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,527 474,318
2018 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 770,519 439,462
2019 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 663,320 497,651
2020 1,429,236 219,127 166,904 14,014 8,143 30,066 1,152,757 1,136,002 57,353 781,339 647,898
2021 1,592,822 261,387 173,821 46,491 8,426 32,649 1,276,150 1,260,673 55,285 1,009,488 583,334
2022 1,617,056 276,488 184,036 48,567 9,480 34,404 1,290,317 1,269,076 50,251 919,441 697,614
2023 1,455,788 292,259 201,335 48,766 8,782 33,376 1,117,978 1,093,371 45,550 779,844 675,943
2021 Dec. 1,592,822 261,387 173,821 46,491 8,426 32,649 1,276,150 1,260,673 55,285 1,009,488 583,334
2022 Jan. 1,479,694 261,965 173,362 46,931 8,504 33,168 1,163,561 1,149,868 54,168 807,889 671,805
Feb. 1,491,552 273,726 184,255 46,854 8,711 33,905 1,164,098 1,149,722 53,729 774,786 716,766
Mar. 1,516,744 277,782 187,779 47,375 8,663 33,965 1,184,501 1,169,952 54,462 808,690 708,055
Apr. 1,491,558 288,953 196,274 48,617 8,799 35,263 1,148,681 1,135,400 53,923 790,221 701,337
May 1,505,419 278,174 186,481 48,031 8,681 34,980 1,173,376 1,159,716 53,869 805,179 700,240
June 1,566,099 281,157 187,573 48,712 8,948 35,923 1,232,176 1,216,530 52,767 826,280 739,819
July 1,514,570 280,910 185,950 49,465 9,086 36,409 1,179,431 1,166,155 54,229 810,881 703,689
Aug. 1,590,572 280,160 184,794 49,614 9,300 36,451 1,258,187 1,245,014 52,225 842,576 747,996
Sep. 1,613,008 281,258 184,022 50,287 9,358 37,592 1,281,266 1,266,647 50,483 829,129 783,879
Oct. 1,569,272 274,421 178,101 49,675 9,527 37,119 1,243,873 1,230,005 50,977 811,035 758,237
Nov. 1,577,175 277,458 183,052 49,168 9,315 35,923 1,248,088 1,233,980 51,629 810,314 766,861
Dec. 1,617,056 276,488 184,036 48,567 9,480 34,404 1,290,317 1,269,076 50,251 919,441 697,614
2023 Jan. 1,508,507 281,692 190,062 48,256 9,437 33,938 1,176,042 1,162,354 50,772 793,716 714,791
Feb. 1,455,724 276,016 183,755 48,582 9,480 34,199 1,130,353 1,114,888 49,356 743,006 712,718
Mar. 1,522,539 288,131 196,405 48,039 9,373 34,314 1,184,604 1,170,620 49,804 791,478 731,061
Apr. 1,431,180 285,667 194,679 47,642 9,297 34,049 1,096,324 1,081,284 49,189 726,986 704,194
May 1,435,049 290,368 197,915 48,658 9,379 34,416 1,095,750 1,081,900 48,931 701,467 733,582
June 1,416,292 280,820 188,991 48,618 9,292 33,919 1,087,034 1,068,747 48,438 718,324 697,969
July 1,399,374 282,438 191,458 48,368 9,184 33,429 1,068,875 1,052,218 48,061 689,447 709,927
Aug. 1,406,665 284,364 192,914 48,979 9,218 33,253 1,074,575 1,056,420 47,725 687,342 719,322
Sep. 1,393,337 282,490 190,232 49,647 9,278 33,333 1,064,193 1,048,059 46,654 713,662 679,675
Oct. 1,415,403 295,288 202,630 49,531 9,256 33,871 1,074,627 1,058,985 45,488 688,966 726,437
Nov. 1,414,241 292,718 201,195 48,939 8,958 33,627 1,076,415 1,060,074 45,107 691,309 722,932
Dec. 1,455,788 292,259 201,335 48,766 8,782 33,376 1,117,978 1,093,371 45,550 779,844 675,943
2024 Jan. 1,397,172 294,402 202,641 49,412 8,921 33,428 1,058,508 1,041,902 44,261 669,890 727,281
Feb. 1,431,638 295,014 202,181 49,313 8,777 34,744 1,093,262 1,075,510 43,361 679,579 752,058
Mar. 1,436,723 312,728 220,571 49,281 8,563 34,314 1,083,242 1,065,759 40,754 666,365 770,359
Apr. 1,428,136 324,404 232,438 49,368 8,591 34,007 1,063,804 1,047,932 39,928 653,953 774,183
May 1,441,362 324,156 232,717 49,501 8,399 33,538 1,077,447 1,061,110 39,758 663,179 778,183
* Assets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to
December 2000 the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revaluations,
at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the basis of
cumulative transaction values. From January 2001 all end-of-month levels are valued at
market prices.  1 Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (acc. to the respective country
designation), since November 2000 also balances with non-euro area central bankswithin the ESCB.  2 Mainly long-term debt securities from issuers within the euro area.
3 Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad.  4 See Deutsche Bundesbank,
Monthly Report, October 2014, p. 22.  5 Difference between External assets and
External liabilities.  6 Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January
1999.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
81•
XII. External sector
8. External positions of enterprises *
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities to non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
End of
reporting
period TotalBalances
with
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
grantedAdvance
payments
effected TotalLoans
from
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
usedAdvance
payments
received
Rest of the world
2020 1,034,224 244,415 789,808 549,157 240,652 213,833 26,819 1,429,615 172,417 1,257,198 1,038,111 219,087 130,318 88,769
2021 1,169,991 256,601 913,391 621,935 291,456 263,269 28,187 1,592,302 217,294 1,375,008 1,117,381 257,627 160,536 97,091
2022 1,247,020 250,759 996,261 675,328 320,933 291,361 29,572 1,629,245 177,095 1,452,150 1,158,894 293,255 192,495 100,760
r 2023 1,359,181 357,997 1,001,184 688,702 312,482 281,494 30,988 1,654,743 214,458 1,440,285 1,154,059 286,226 179,792 106,434
r 2023 Nov. 1,428,718 424,573 1,004,145 687,871 316,274 285,074 31,200 1,706,154 247,545 1,458,609 1,173,360 285,249 176,526 108,723
r Dec. 1,359,181 357,997 1,001,184 688,702 312,482 281,494 30,988 1,654,743 214,458 1,440,285 1,154,059 286,226 179,792 106,434
r 2024 Jan. 1,375,656 379,972 995,684 696,014 299,669 267,303 32,366 1,689,771 241,894 1,447,877 1,172,837 275,040 165,678 109,363
r Feb. 1,384,720 392,632 992,088 691,978 300,110 266,967 33,143 1,706,923 259,317 1,447,607 1,172,012 275,595 163,816 111,779
r Mar. 1,398,155 383,445 1,014,710 703,306 311,403 277,810 33,593 1,694,193 249,362 1,444,831 1,162,251 282,580 170,204 112,375
p Apr. 1,409,698 390,211 1,019,487 708,631 310,856 277,816 33,039 1,723,607 268,340 1,455,268 1,174,735 280,533 167,508 113,025
EU Member States (27 excl. GB)
2020 613,888 185,572 428,316 334,474 93,842 80,833 13,009 903,486 97,851 805,635 715,854 89,781 61,887 27,895
2021 663,042 193,246 469,796 361,161 108,635 95,778 12,857 996,712 152,239 844,473 740,274 104,198 74,585 29,614
2022 712,912 190,773 522,139 397,836 124,303 110,821 13,482 1,006,529 126,999 879,530 764,435 115,095 84,054 31,041
r 2023 816,276 284,817 531,459 410,769 120,690 106,262 14,428 1,014,822 139,380 875,442 759,104 116,338 83,290 33,048
r 2023 Nov. 876,921 346,800 530,121 403,013 127,108 112,557 14,551 1,015,280 139,305 875,974 758,182 117,792 84,502 33,290
r Dec. 816,276 284,817 531,459 410,769 120,690 106,262 14,428 1,014,822 139,380 875,442 759,104 116,338 83,290 33,048
r 2024 Jan. 849,062 311,677 537,385 417,429 119,957 105,306 14,651 1,037,530 147,900 889,630 778,335 111,295 77,513 33,782
r Feb. 864,878 325,505 539,373 416,291 123,082 108,088 14,995 1,056,431 166,045 890,386 775,171 115,216 80,795 34,420
r Mar. 860,920 314,938 545,982 420,482 125,499 110,235 15,264 1,040,327 162,630 877,697 761,531 116,166 81,818 34,347
p Apr. 866,616 316,650 549,966 423,935 126,031 111,312 14,719 1,068,292 183,207 885,084 769,452 115,632 81,539 34,093
Extra-EU Member States (27 incl. GB)
2020 420,335 58,843 361,492 214,682 146,810 133,000 13,810 526,129 74,566 451,563 322,257 129,306 68,431 60,875
2021 506,949 63,355 443,594 260,773 182,821 167,491 15,330 595,590 65,055 530,535 377,107 153,429 85,951 67,478
2022 534,107 59,986 474,122 277,492 196,629 180,540 16,090 622,716 50,096 572,620 394,460 178,160 108,441 69,719
r 2023 542,904 73,180 469,725 277,933 191,792 175,232 16,560 639,921 75,078 564,843 394,955 169,888 96,501 73,386
r 2023 Nov. 551,796 77,773 474,023 284,857 189,166 172,517 16,649 690,875 108,240 582,635 415,178 167,457 92,024 75,433
r Dec. 542,904 73,180 469,725 277,933 191,792 175,232 16,560 639,921 75,078 564,843 394,955 169,888 96,501 73,386
r 2024 Jan. 526,593 68,295 458,298 278,586 179,713 161,997 17,715 652,241 93,994 558,247 394,502 163,745 88,165 75,580
r Feb. 519,842 67,127 452,715 275,687 177,028 158,879 18,148 650,492 93,272 557,220 396,841 160,379 83,021 77,358
r Mar. 537,235 68,507 468,728 282,824 185,904 167,575 18,329 653,866 86,732 567,134 400,720 166,414 88,386 78,028
p Apr. 543,082 73,561 469,521 284,696 184,825 166,505 18,320 655,315 85,132 570,183 405,283 164,901 85,969 78,932
Euro area (20)
2020 527,566 164,697 362,869 289,362 73,507 61,759 11,748 816,066 76,137 739,929 670,289 69,640 47,662 21,978
2021 556,549 171,231 385,318 299,905 85,413 73,729 11,684 911,712 130,558 781,154 699,065 82,089 58,608 23,481
2022 606,206 171,716 434,490 338,439 96,050 83,930 12,120 916,735 105,597 811,138 722,183 88,954 64,756 24,198
r 2023 713,257 266,931 446,326 352,927 93,399 80,382 13,016 921,774 119,987 801,787 712,302 89,485 64,843 24,642
r 2023 Nov. 772,878 330,217 442,661 343,896 98,765 85,690 13,075 917,802 116,492 801,310 712,483 88,827 63,982 24,845
r Dec. 713,257 266,931 446,326 352,927 93,399 80,382 13,016 921,774 119,987 801,787 712,302 89,485 64,843 24,642
r 2024 Jan. 750,627 294,807 455,820 363,072 92,748 79,550 13,198 933,855 119,349 814,505 730,163 84,342 59,234 25,108
r Feb. 765,169 307,753 457,416 362,462 94,954 81,400 13,554 949,736 136,402 813,334 727,038 86,296 60,714 25,583
r Mar. 760,512 298,258 462,254 365,821 96,433 82,644 13,789 934,237 136,205 798,032 711,671 86,361 61,060 25,301
p Apr. 766,740 300,242 466,498 368,948 97,549 84,250 13,299 959,036 152,405 806,631 720,513 86,118 61,275 24,843
Extra-Euro area (20)
2020 506,658 79,719 426,939 259,794 167,145 152,074 15,071 613,549 96,280 517,269 367,822 149,448 82,656 66,792
2021 613,443 85,369 528,073 322,030 206,043 189,540 16,504 680,590 86,735 593,854 418,316 175,538 101,928 73,610
2022 640,814 . . . 224,882 207,431 17,452 712,510 . . . 204,301 127,739 76,562
r 2023 645,924 . . . 219,083 201,112 17,971 732,970 . . . 196,741 114,949 81,792
r 2023 Nov. 655,839 . . . 217,509 199,384 18,125 788,352 . . . 196,422 112,544 83,878
r Dec. 645,924 . . . 219,083 201,112 17,971 732,970 . . . 196,741 114,949 81,792
r 2024 Jan. 625,029 . . . 206,921 187,753 19,168 755,916 . . . 190,698 106,443 84,254
r Feb. 619,552 . . . 205,157 185,567 19,589 757,188 . . . 189,298 103,102 86,196
r Mar. 637,643 . . . 214,970 195,166 19,804 759,956 . . . 196,219 109,144 87,075
p Apr. 642,958 . . . 213,307 193,567 19,740 764,571 . . . 194,415 106,233 88,182
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are shown
in Table 4 of Section IV., “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not beeneliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the figures
shown in Table XII.7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
82•
XII. External sector
9. ECB`s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly
or monthly
averageAustralia
AUDCanada
CADChina
CNYDenmark
DKKJapan
JPYNorway
NOKSweden
SEKSwitzerland
CHFUnited Kingdom
GBPUnited States
USD
2012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.2848
2013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.3281
2014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.1069
2017 1.4732 1.4647 7.6290 7.4386 126.71 9.3270 9.6351 1.1117 0.87667 1.1297
2018 1.5797 1.5294 7.8081 7.4532 130.40 9.5975 10.2583 1.1550 0.88471 1.1810
2019 1.6109 1.4855 7.7355 7.4661 122.01 9.8511 10.5891 1.1124 0.87777 1.1195
2020 1.6549 1.5300 7.8747 7.4542 121.85 10.7228 10.4848 1.0705 0.88970 1.1422
2021 1.5749 1.4826 7.6282 7.4370 129.88 10.1633 10.1465 1.0811 0.85960 1.1827
2022 1.5167 1.3695 7.0788 7.4396 138.03 10.1026 10.6296 1.0047 0.85276 1.0530
2023 1.6288 1.4595 7.6600 7.4509 151.99 11.4248 11.4788 0.9718 0.86979 1.0813
2023 Jan. 1.5523 1.4474 7.3173 7.4383 140.54 10.7149 11.2051 0.9961 0.88212 1.0769
Feb. 1.5514 1.4400 7.3244 7.4447 142.38 10.9529 11.1725 0.9905 0.88550 1.0715
Mar. 1.6034 1.4649 7.3807 7.4456 143.01 11.2858 11.2276 0.9908 0.88192 1.0706
Apr. 1.6389 1.4792 7.5561 7.4518 146.51 11.5187 11.3370 0.9846 0.88115 1.0968
May 1.6346 1.4687 7.5948 7.4485 148.93 11.7330 11.3697 0.9751 0.87041 1.0868
June 1.6157 1.4414 7.7653 7.4492 153.15 11.7164 11.6766 0.9764 0.85861 1.0840
July 1.6423 1.4618 7.9482 7.4508 155.94 11.3474 11.6343 0.9663 0.85856 1.1058
Aug. 1.6818 1.4703 7.9096 7.4522 157.96 11.4127 11.8117 0.9588 0.85892 1.0909
Sep. 1.6622 1.4458 7.7967 7.4566 157.80 11.4525 11.8417 0.9600 0.86158 1.0684
Oct. 1.6637 1.4474 7.7200 7.4604 158.04 11.6284 11.6472 0.9547 0.86798 1.0563
Nov. 1.6634 1.4828 7.8087 7.4581 161.84 11.7958 11.5475 0.9634 0.87045 1.0808
Dec. 1.6321 1.4653 7.7870 7.4556 157.21 11.5333 11.2028 0.9441 0.86168 1.0903
2024 Jan. 1.6422 1.4631 7.8201 7.4572 159.46 11.3501 11.2834 0.9368 0.85873 1.0905
Feb. 1.6533 1.4564 7.7651 7.4550 161.38 11.3843 11.2500 0.9462 0.85466 1.0795
Mar. 1.6586 1.4726 7.8297 7.4566 162.77 11.5214 11.3054 0.9656 0.85524 1.0872
Apr. 1.6469 1.4661 7.7658 7.4596 165.03 11.6828 11.5910 0.9761 0.85658 1.0728
May 1.6317 1.4780 7.8206 7.4606 168.54 11.5988 11.6186 0.9830 0.85564 1.0812
* Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference
rates, see Statistical Series Exchange rate statistics.
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units … 
1999 January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603    
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399    
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573  
France French franc FRF 6.55957  
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583  
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27        
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399    
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371  
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482      
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386      
2001 January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750      
2007 January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640      
2008 January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009 January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260    
2011 January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466    
2014 January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015 January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280  
2023 January 1 Croatia Croatian kuna HRK 7.53450  

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
June 2024
83•
XII. External sector
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness *
Q1 1999 = 100
Effective exchange rates of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the  Indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness
extended EER group of trading partners  1broad EER group of
trading partners  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 vis-à-vis Based on consumer price indices vis-à-vis 
27 selected industrial countries  4
of which:
Period NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indicesIn real terms
based on
the deflators
of gross
domestic
product  3In real terms
based on
unit labour
costs of
national
economy  3 NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indices TotalEuro area
countriesNon-
euro area
countries 37 countries  527 selected
industrial
countries  437 countries  560 countries  6
1999 96.2 96.1 95.8 96.1 96.5 95.9 97.9 99.6 95.7 97.6 98.3 98.1 97.8
2000 87.0 86.8 85.9 85.6 88.0 86.1 92.0 97.5 85.4 91.1 93.1 92.3 91.2
2001 87.4 87.1 86.6 84.5 90.1 86.9 91.8 96.6 86.0 90.5 93.0 91.7 91.1
2002 89.7 90.3 89.8 88.2 94.4 90.5 92.3 95.7 88.4 91.1 93.5 92.2 91.9
2003 100.5 101.6 101.1 99.4 106.5 101.7 95.9 94.9 97.5 95.3 97.0 96.7 96.8
2004 104.3 105.6 104.3 102.8 111.0 105.6 96.2 93.6 99.9 95.6 98.5 98.2 98.4
2005 102.9 104.3 102.3 101.0 109.1 103.2 94.8 92.1 98.7 93.3 98.5 97.2 96.8
2006 102.9 104.3 101.8 100.0 109.3 102.6 93.6 90.5 98.1 91.7 98.6 96.8 96.0
2007 106.5 107.3 104.1 101.8 112.9 104.8 94.6 89.7 102.1 92.1 100.9 98.3 97.4
2008 110.4 110.3 106.3 105.8 117.8 107.3 95.0 88.5 105.2 91.4 102.4 98.5 97.6
2009 111.9 111.1 107.4 109.4 120.8 108.3 95.3 89.3 104.7 92.1 101.9 98.6 97.9
2010 104.6 103.3 99.1 101.8 112.1 99.3 92.6 88.8 98.3 88.2 98.8 94.3 92.5
2011 104.4 102.4 97.2 100.0 112.9 98.8 92.2 88.5 97.7 87.4 98.2 93.5 91.9
2012 98.6 97.0 91.6 94.2 107.6 94.0 90.2 88.4 92.6 84.8 95.9 90.5 88.9
2013 102.2 100.1 94.7 97.1 112.4 97.0 92.4 88.9 97.6 86.7 98.1 92.3 90.9
2014 102.4 99.5 94.7 97.3 114.7 97.4 93.0 89.7 97.9 87.5 98.2 92.5 91.5
2015 92.5 89.6 86.0 86.6 106.1 88.7 89.9 90.4 89.1 83.7 94.3 87.8 86.9
2016 95.2 91.6 88.3 p 87.9 110.1 90.7 90.8 90.8 90.6 85.0 95.0 88.8 88.1
2017 97.5 93.6 89.5 p 88.8 112.5 92.0 92.0 90.9 93.5 85.8 96.3 89.9 88.9
2018 100.0 95.8 91.1 p 90.6 117.3 95.2 93.3 91.1 96.6 86.8 97.7 91.1 90.8
2019 98.1 93.3 89.3 p 88.1 115.5 92.5 92.3 91.3 93.8 86.0 96.4 89.9 89.4
2020 99.7 93.7 90.1 p 89.4 119.2 93.9 92.6 91.6 93.9 86.6 96.4 90.1 90.1
2021 99.6 93.7 p 89.4 p 87.6 120.5 94.3 93.6 92.0 96.0 86.9 97.4 90.6 90.9
2022 95.3 90.8 p 84.3 p 82.8 116.1 p 90.9 92.3 91.7 92.9 85.3 95.9 89.1 89.0
2023 98.1 94.0 p 88.4 p 86.5 121.8 p 94.7 93.7 92.0 96.3 87.3 98.0 91.3 p 91.6
2021 Dec. 97.0 91.4 118.6 92.4 95.8 88.9 89.4
2022 Jan. 96.6 91.4 118.2 p 92.3 96.0 89.0 89.4
Feb. 96.8 91.8 p 85.7 p 84.1 118.5 p 92.6 92.8 91.8 94.1 85.6 96.1 89.0 89.3
Mar. 95.8 91.5 117.9 p 92.6 96.3 89.4 89.9
Apr. 95.0 90.1 116.0 p 90.3 96.1 88.9 88.8
May 95.4 90.5 p 84.1 p 82.6 115.8 p 90.2 92.3 91.6 93.2 85.1 96.5 89.5 89.1
June 95.7 90.7 116.1 p 90.3 95.7 88.7 88.4
July 93.9 89.2 114.1 p 88.9 94.8 87.9 87.5
Aug. 93.4 88.9 p 82.4 p 81.2 113.6 p 88.6 91.7 91.8 91.3 84.7 94.5 87.7 87.3
Sep. 93.9 89.8 113.9 p 89.3 95.9 89.1 88.7
Oct. 94.5 91.3 114.8 p 90.8 96.0 89.7 89.4
Nov. 95.7 92.3 p 85.1 p 83.4 116.6 p 92.0 92.3 91.7 93.0 85.8 97.0 90.6 90.3
Dec. 96.8 92.6 118.6 p 92.9 96.2 89.7 89.8
2023 Jan. 97.1 92.8 119.2 p 93.1 97.5 90.4 p 90.4
Feb. 97.0 93.1 p 87.2 p 85.5 119.3 p 93.4 93.0 91.3 95.3 86.1 97.6 90.5 p 90.6
Mar. 97.3 93.3 119.7 p 93.7 98.0 90.9 p 91.1
Apr. 98.4 94.2 121.5 p 94.9 98.5 91.5 p 91.9
May 98.0 93.6 p 88.2 p 85.9 120.9 p 94.2 93.6 91.8 96.2 87.0 98.1 91.1 p 91.3
June 98.2 93.8 121.8 p 94.7 98.2 91.3 p 91.8
July 99.2 94.9 123.7 p 96.1 98.5 91.9 p 92.5
Aug. 99.0 95.0 p 89.0 p 87.4 123.7 p 96.1 93.9 92.1 96.6 87.9 98.3 91.9 p 92.5
Sep. 98.5 94.6 123.0 p 95.5 98.0 91.7 p 92.1
Oct. 98.0 94.1 122.5 p 95.0 97.7 91.3 p 91.7
Nov. 98.7 94.6 p 89.0 p 87.1 123.4 p 95.3 94.5 92.7 97.1 88.2 98.2 91.6 p 91.9
Dec. 98.2 93.9 123.2 p 94.9 97.7 91.1 p 91.5
2024 Jan. 98.4 p 94.4 123.6 p 95.2 97.8 p 91.4 p 91.8
Feb. 98.1 p 94.2 ... ... 123.3 p 94.9 94.1 92.5 96.6 p 88.0 97.7 p 91.3 p 91.6
Mar. 98.8 p 94.8 124.2 p 95.5 98.0 p 91.7 p 92.1
Apr. 98.6 p 94.6 124.0 p 95.2 98.2 p 91.8 p 92.1
May 98.9 p 94.8 ... ... 124.4 p 95.3 ... ... ... ... p98.6 p 92.0 p 92.2
* The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the curren-
cy concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German economy's price
competitiveness is consistent with the procedure to compute the effective exchange
rates of the euro. A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. The
weights are based on trade in manufactured goods and services. For more detailed in-
formation on methodology and weighting scale, see the website of the Deutsche
Bundesbank (https://www.bundesbank.de/content/796162).  1 The calculations are
based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral exchange rates of the
euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the following 18 countries: Australia, Bulgaria, Canada,
China, Czechia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Norway, Poland, Romania,
Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United
States. Where current price and wage indices were not available, estimates were used.
2 Includes countries belonging to the extended EER group of trading partners (fixed
composition) and additionally the following 23 countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil,
Chile, Colombia, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zea-
land, Peru, Philippines, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Taiwan,Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine and United Arab Emirates. The ECB has suspended the
publication and calculation of the euro foreign exchange reference rate against Russian
rouble with effect from March 2, 2022 until further notice. For the calculation of
effective exchange rates, an indicative rate is used for the Russian Federation from that
date. It is calculated from the daily RUB/USD rates determined by the Bank of Russia in
conjunction with the respective ECB's euro foreign exchange reference rate to the US
dollar.  3 Annual and quarterly averages.  4 Euro area countries (from 2001 including
Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta, from
2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including Latvia, from
2015 including Lithuania, from 2023 including Croatia) as well as Canada, Denmark,
Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.
5 Euro area countries (current composition) and countries belonging to the extended
EER group of trading partners (fixed comosition).  6 Euro area countries (current compo-
sition) and countries belonging to the broad EER group of trading partners (fixed
composition).

