Monthly Report – 
September 2024
Vol. 76 No 9

Table of Content
Commentaries  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
What impact does European climate policy have on German foreign direct 
investment?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
The performance of German credit institutions in 2023  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  46
DORA from the perspective of on-site inspections  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  109
EU budget and NextGenerationEU off-budget entity: Member States’ 
financial relationships in 2023  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  132

3Commentaries
Monthly Report – September 2024

Commentaries
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 41 Economic conditions
1.1 German economy continues to be weak
The German economy is still navigating choppy waters.  Output in the industrial 
sector and in construction got off to a sluggish start in the third quarter of 2024, with 
heightened economic policy uncertainty weighing on business. Furthermore, higher 
financing costs are still making themselves felt; this is dampening demand for 
industrial goods and construction work, in particular. Although new orders from 
abroad appear to be beginning to recover slightly, this did not so far suffice to mitigate 
the lack of orders in industry overall. In spite of favourable conditions – negotiated 
wages are growing strongly and the labour market outlook remains relatively stable – 
private consumption is still struggling to get off the ground. Sentiment indicators and 
data on new passenger car registrations, for example, suggest that consumers remain 
cautious about spending. Uncertainty about the future outlook for private consumption 
and services is currently elevated, however. Seasonally adjusted sales in the trade and 
services sectors are not yet available for the whole of the second quarter.  Overall, 
from today's perspective, real gross domestic product ( ) could stagnate or decline GDP
again somewhat in the third quarter. The prospect of a recession , in the sense of a 
sharp, broad-based and persistent decline in economic output, looks unlikely at the 
current time, however. 1) 
1 See Federal Statistical Office (2024).

Commentaries
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 51.2 Weak domestic demand weighs on industry
While domestic demand remained weak, the overall slightly more dynamic 
economic activity in the euro area propped up demand for German industrial 
products.  After seasonal adjustment,  new orders in Germany’s industrial sector rose 
substantially in July 2024 for the second consecutive month. Excluding large orders, the 
intake of orders was down slightly on the previous month but, in a quarter-on-quarter 
comparison, new orders were up significantly overall and slightly higher when 
excluding large orders. A small recovery is thus beginning to emerge. Industrial orders 
excluding large orders had already risen again in the second quarter, following a 
period of decline since the third quarter of 2022. As in the second quarter, positive 
impetus was provided from abroad, in particular from the euro area. In July, however, 
new domestic orders excluding large orders were down on the level of the previous 
quarter. Overall, the increase in new orders was still not enough to mitigate the lack of 
orders in industry, however. According to the quarterly ifo Institute survey, more than 
 2) 
2 Seasonal adjustment here and in the remainder of this text also includes adjustment for calendar variations, 
provided they can be verified and quantified.

Commentaries
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 640% of manufacturing firms complained of a lack of orders in July. This share is thus 
once again up on the already high April figure. At the same time, the reach of order 
books remained high in a long-term comparison. Together with the very low capacity 
utilisation, this might indicate that firms are spreading their orders over a longer 
period. 
The bout of weakness in industrial output continued at the beginning of the third 
quarter.  In July, seasonally adjusted industrial output fell strongly on both the month 
and the quarter. Almost all sectors were affected by the decline. Production in energy-
intensive sectors was down somewhat as well, following two quarters of rising output. 
Only output in the chemicals industry was still above the average of the previous 
quarter, despite declining on the month. Motor vehicle production recorded a 
particularly steep decline in July, but there may have been a strong countermovement 
here in August. According to the German Association of the Automotive Industry ( ), VDA
the number of passenger cars manufactured rose very substantially in August. This 
suggests that special factors such as plant shutdowns also played a role in the strong 
decline in July. Taking the more meaningful average of July and August combined, the 
number of passenger cars manufactured exceeded the previous quarter's level 
considerably. However, industry is likely to continue to weaken over the remainder of 
the third quarter as well. According to ifo Institute data, firms assessed their situation 
as less favourable in August. Short-term production plans and export expectations 
likewise deteriorated.


Commentaries
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 71.3 Private consumption likely to remain dampened initially
Private consumption is still lacklustre in spite of favourable conditions.  Wages are 
rising significantly more strongly than prices. After posting smaller growth in the 
second quarter for a time, negotiated wages are likely to rise very sharply in the third 
quarter. As defined in the Bundesbank’s negotiated pay rate statistics, they were up by 
10.6% on the year in July. The significant fluctuations are due in large to inflation 
compensation bonuses, wage increases with a time lag and the back payments agreed 
in some of the more recent pay settlements. Furthermore, employment is increasing 
slightly and the labour market outlook is relatively stable. At least some of the resulting 
gains in purchasing power are expected to gradually be reflected in private 
consumption. Consumers are likely to continue to hold back on spending, however. 
Consumer sentiment improved when compared with the previous quarter but the  GfK
consumer climate index became perceptibly gloomier again in August. The economic 
expectations of surveyed consumers deteriorated significantly, and income 
expectations even fell strongly. The propensity to purchase decreased slightly in the 
meantime, with the propensity to save increasing in line with this. Data made available 
by the German Association of the Automotive Industry ( ) indicate that consumers VDA
are reluctant to purchase cars. Taking the average of July and August combined, new 
passenger car registrations dropped significantly compared with the previous quarter. 
Among the relevant private consumption indicators, seasonally adjusted sales in retail 
trade and in the hotel and restaurant sector are currently only available up to April, in a 
break from standard practice. However, taking the average of July and August 
combined, the business situation deteriorated in both areas compared with the 
previous quarter, according to ifo Institute surveys. All of this indicates an ongoing 
uncertainty among households.
1.4 Lack of stimulus in the labour market
The absence of any economic stimulus is gradually having an impact on both labour 
market developments and the outlook.  The level of employment in Germany is 
exceptionally high. However, employment growth has weakened of late. Seasonally 
adjusted total employment barely rose in July (+4,000 persons). This is due to a 
moderate decline in employment in manufacturing, construction and trade, which was 
just about offset by additional hirings in some service industries. In terms of number, 
more large-scale redundancies are prevented in manufacturing by a gradual increase 

Commentaries
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 8in short-time work. In June, 2.7% of all employees subject to social security 
contributions were in short-time work. Short-time work is virtually irrelevant in other 
sectors, however. 
The lack of a recovery is impacting the employment plans of firms in parts of trade 
and industry.  The ifo employment barometer stabilised in the first half of the year 
following a two-year period of decline. However, it fell again in the holiday months to 
its lowest point since the pandemic. Employment expectations are considerably 
negative in the manufacturing and trade sectors. However, the picture painted by other 
leading indicators is not nearly as conclusive. For the economy as a whole, the 
employment barometer of the Institute for Employment Research ( ) is more stable IAB
and remains in positive territory. The number of vacant positions reported to the 
Federal Employment Agency has fallen by just over one-fifth since mid-2022. At the 
same time, this number has remained relatively high and the process of filling positions 
is still difficult and time-consuming. The heterogeneous picture painted by the 
indicators is likely to be attributable to, amongst other things, the pronounced 
structural change, which alongside the pre-existing lull in orders in parts of 
manufacturing, construction and trade led to strong demand in some sectors, such as 
healthcare and long-term care, education, and energy and water supply. 


Commentaries
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 9Unemployment barely rose any further in August.  In seasonally adjusted terms, 2.80 
million persons were registered as unemployed. This was only around 2,000 persons 
more than in July. The increases had been more significant in previous months. The 
unemployment rate persisted at 6.0%. Compared with the previous year, 
unemployment under the cyclically sensitive statutory unemployment insurance 
scheme increased by 111,000 persons, whereas growth in the number of unemployed 
receiving the basic welfare allowance was smaller, at 65,000. Higher unemployment is 
primarily a result of the persistent economic weakness. Alongside higher 
unemployment in the statutory unemployment insurance scheme, this is likely to be a 
factor behind some of the increase in the number of basic welfare allowance recipients, 
as some unemployed persons were no longer entitled to claim insurance benefits. 
However, the integration of immigrants into the German social security system, 
particularly significant in 2022-23, is likely to play only a secondary role. The  IAB
unemployment barometer suggests unemployment will rise only slightly over the next 
few months. 
1.5 Energy commodity prices mixed recently
Developments in energy commodity prices have been mixed recently.  Crude oil 
prices declined significantly over the past weeks. As this report went to press, a barrel 
of Brent crude oil cost US$77, around 11% less than as recently as July. This can 
probably be attributed mainly to demand concerns and the glut in the global oil market 
anticipated for 2025. By contrast, prices were propped up by the decision of some  OPEC
countries and their partners to postpone their proposed production increases for the 
time being, as well as by production stoppages in Libya and the United States. On the 
other hand, European gas prices rose slightly of late due to concerns about Russian gas 
deliveries through Ukraine. 
1.6 Inflation rate sinks to 2.0% in August
Price developments at the upstream stages of the economy were uneven as of late.  
In industrial domestic sales, prices rose slightly in July after seasonal adjustment. This 
was true of both energy and other goods. By contrast, import prices were down 
slightly. This was mainly due to a steep fall in energy prices, yet other goods were also 
slightly cheaper. Compared with the previous year, industrial producer prices were still 
around 1% down on their level at that time, however, whereas the rise in import prices 
was similar to that of the previous year.

Commentaries
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 10The inflation rate fell surprisingly significantly in August.  The Harmonised Index of 
Consumer Prices was unchanged from the previous month in seasonally adjusted 
terms. On the one hand, energy prices declined significantly. The recently depressed 
profit margins for refined petroleum products are unlikely to have seen much of a 
recovery. Prices of other industrial goods likewise fell perceptibly. On the other hand, 
food prices rose slightly. Prices for services climbed significantly higher again overall 
when compared with the previous month. This was partly attributable to travel services. 
The rise in prices for less volatile services components remained above average but 
was not as substantial as in the previous months. On balance, headline inflation fell 
considerably from 2.6% to 2.0% year-on-year.  The increase in energy prices in 
summer 2023 had a dampening effect here. Core inflation excluding energy and food 
decreased a little less sharply, from 3.3% to 3.0%.
Higher inflation figures are expected again over the coming months.  In September, 
inflation is likely to initially remain at a similarly low level to that seen in August, as 
energy prices are expected to be down markedly on the year for now. Inflation is 
subsequently expected to rise again slowly. Taken in isolation, energy prices, which 
dropped significantly last autumn, will push up the annual rate of inflation as a base 
effect from October. In addition, the narrow profit margins for refined petroleum 
products could recover, which would counteract the recent decline in crude oil prices. 
Owing to substantial wage growth, the underlying upward pressure on prices will 
probably not drop much further from an already high level for now. 3) 
3 The annual rate of inflation according to the national Consumer Price Index fell from 2.3% to 1.9%.

Commentaries
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 11


Commentaries
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 122 Public finances
2.1 Public long-term care insurance scheme
The public long-term care insurance scheme posted a deficit of €1 billion in the first 
half of 2024. Due to one-off effects, this was up by almost €½ billion on the year. This 
was chiefly attributable to transfers to the long-term care provident fund from the core 
area of the long-term care insurance scheme being discussed here.  These transfers 
had been deferred in the previous year and are being back paid in the current year. 
Factoring out these transfers would result in a surplus of close to €½ billion and a €1 
billion improvement in the scheme’s outturn in the first half of 2024.
 4) 
4 Since 2015, resources have been channelled according to set rules into a special fund to be used in the next 
decade in order to somewhat mitigate the expected rise in the contribution rate caused by demographic 
change.

Commentaries
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 13The public long-term care insurance scheme’s revenue rose sharply in the first half 
of 2024, in particular as a result of a contribution rate hike in mid-2023. Almost two-
thirds of the increase of just over 18% in contribution receipts was attributable to the 
hike in contribution rates. At the same time, the sharp rise in earnings subject to 
compulsory contributions and pension payments had an impact. Meanwhile, the 
annual central government grant of €1 billion only introduced with the long-term care 
reform in 2022 was discontinued. In the previous year, this grant had been paid out 
almost entirely in the first quarter, meaning that revenue from central government was 
now down sharply.
The long-term care insurance scheme’s expenditure continued to exhibit 
considerably stronger growth than earnings subject to compulsory contributions 
and pensions in the first half of 2024.  Overall, expenditure rose by almost 15%. After 
deducting the transfers to the long-term care provident fund, this still amounts to 
growth of just over 10%. This increase was not solely due to the demographically driven 
rise in those receiving care benefits but was compounded at the start of 2024 by 
increases in the long-term care allowance and non-cash benefits for home care as well 
as a further decrease in co-payments for inpatient care.
A significant deficit is anticipated for 2024 as a whole, which may result in 
contribution rates being raised next year. Expenditure can be expected to continue 
increasing significantly, whereas the revenue growth from the contribution rate hike 
will fall away in the second half of the year. The financial result for the second half of 
the year is therefore unlikely to show an improvement on the first half, as would 
normally be the case. The scheme's reserves, which were still €2 billion above their 
lower limit at the end of 2023, would then be at risk of falling below it.  further  A
contribution rate rise could therefore be on the cards as early as next year.
2.2 Statutory health insurance scheme
In the first half of 2024, the statutory health insurance ( )SHI  scheme recorded a high 
deficit of €8½ billion – just over €2 billion more than a year earlier. At €6½ billion, the 
bulk of that was attributable to the health fund. It is drawing on reserves to stabilise 
the supplementary contribution rate, as politically intended. However, health insurance  
institutions likewise posted a deficit of €2 billion – after a deficit of only €½ billion a year 
earlier. Above all, this was due to a strong rise in expenditure on benefits of just over 
 5) 

Commentaries
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 147½%.  This expenditure markedly exceeded the expectations held by the group of  SHI
estimators in autumn of last year (+6%), on which basis the health insurance 
institutions had determined their supplementary contribution rates for 2024.
The health insurance fund's deficit is likely to fall below its mid-year level over the 
remainder of the year and to be well covered by reserves. As usual for the time of 
year, the result will be improved at year-end by  scheme contributions paid on SHI
bonuses. Furthermore, earnings subject to compulsory contributions are likely to 
increasingly replace inflation compensation bonuses exempt from social contributions. 
This will further support revenue developments. The deficit could thus reach the €4 
billion figure  derived from the plans for 2024 as a whole. Reserves, which had stood 
at €9½ billion at the end of 2023, would thereby continue to comfortably reach their 
minimum level of just over €4½ billion at the end of 2024.
However, the situation is far more tense for health insurance institutions. Their 
average supplementary contribution rate had markedly increased at the start of the 
year already to the level of 1.7% then deemed necessary by the Federal Ministry of 
 5) 
 6) 
5 For more on this development, see Federal Ministry of Health (2024). In Chart 1.6, health insurance institutions’ 
increase in expenditure on benefits is obscured by the health fund’s abating special expenditure in the first 
quarter (in particular for energy price assistance and coronavirus tests). Central government refunds for such 
expenditure coming to an end dampened the  scheme’s revenue developments as well.SHI
6 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2024).

Commentaries
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 15Health to cover expenditure. At the end of 2023, health insurance institutions’ overall 
reserves had still been just over €3 billion above the statutory lower limit for 2024. If 
the deficit recorded at the mid-year mark is extrapolated, calculations indicate that this 
margin would be whittled away. There is no alleviating seasonal factor like there is for 
the health fund, because it makes fixed monthly payments to the health insurance 
institutions. Against this backdrop, several health insurance institutions have already 
raised their supplementary contribution rates markedly over the course of this year: 
the average rate stood at almost 1.8% in August, and additional increases are already 
anticipated.
The group of SHI estimators will discuss further financial developments beyond the 
current year in October.  Subsequently, the Federal Ministry of Health will calculate the 
supplementary contribution rate necessary to cover expenditure for 2025. As 
expenditure is likely to continue rising sharply, a further increase in this rate is already 
on the cards. 7) 
7 See Federal Ministry of Health (2024) and National Association of Statutory Health Insurance Funds (2024).

Commentaries
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 16List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024), Commentaries , Monthly Report, March 2024.
Federal Ministry of Health (2024), Finanzentwicklung der GKV im 1. Halbjahr 2024 .
Federal Statistical Office (2024), Wiederaufnahme der Konjunkturberichterstattung im 
Handel und Dienstleistungsbereich, press release No 332 of 30 August 2024.
-GKV Spitzenverband (2024), -GKV Finanzen: Weiter „Augen zu und durch“ ist keine 
Option .
 

17What impact does 
European climate policy 
have on German foreign 
direct investment?
Monthly Report – September 2024

What impact does European climate policy have on German foreign direct investment?
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 18The European Union first made a binding commitment to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions in the 1997 Kyoto Protocol.  In 2005, it introduced the European Union 
Emissions Trading System   as an essential element of its climate policy. Since (EU )ETS
then, the   has undergone multiple reforms. Major changes came into force in EUETS
2008, 2013, 2021 and, most recently, in 2023 as part of the Fit for 55 package. The  EU
 is based on the cap and trade principle. The European Union sets caps for ETS
greenhouse gas emissions (cap), and the Member States issue corresponding tradeable 
emissions allowances (trade). Over time, the caps are reduced and consequently the 
number of permits to emit greenhouse gases. Under these conditions, allowance prices 
have intermittently reached €100 per tonne of carbon equivalent amid sometimes 
strong volatility, and stood at around €70 per tonne at last count. Given rising 
emissions costs, individual issuers of greenhouse gases are faced with the choice of 
reducing their emissions by investing in lower-emissions technologies, acquiring 
allowances or closing production sites within the scope of the   that are no longer EUETS
competitive. They may then potentially relocate production to regions where emissions 
are cheaper (carbon leakage).
Enterprise-specific data on foreign direct investment and greenhouse gas emissions 
allows an analysis of whether European climate policy has an impact on German 
enterprises’ outward foreign direct investment decisions. A Bundesbank analysis 
empirically examines whether the reforms that entered into force in 2013 and 2021 had 
demonstrable effects on foreign direct investment decisions. So far, there is no 
significant evidence to suggest that German enterprises responded to stricter 
emissions legislation by increasingly relocating production to countries with less 
stringent climate policies. However, even before the reforms, enterprises with 
comparatively high greenhouse gas emissions had a disproportionately large presence 
in non-European countries. Moreover, since 2014, enterprises that mainly operate 
within the European Economic Area  have reined in their greenhouse gas ( )EEA
emissions more strongly than firms in the same sector with high levels of foreign direct 
investment outside the .EEA
An internationally coordinated climate policy aimed at broadly uniform emissions 
prices could prevent multinational enterprises from using their foreign locations to 
produce under comparatively milder emissions standards. However, a globally 
coordinated price for emissions appears politically unrealistic. As the second-best 
solution, the  could employ economic policy measures in response to international EU
differences in carbon prices, which distort competition. One such measure is the  1) 
1 Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change which entered into force on 16 
February 2005. The European Union ratified it on 31 May 2002.

What impact does European climate policy have on German foreign direct investment?
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 19carbon border adjustment mechanism, which was introduced in October 2023. It is also 
important to provide enterprises with a stable framework on their road to climate-
neutral value creation. To this end, the  and Germany’s Federal Government should EU
formulate clear milestones that leave enterprises sufficient scope to carry out the 
transformation under their own responsibility. The completion of the capital markets 
union could benefit smaller and innovative enterprises, in particular, by making it 
easier for them to access risk capital.

What impact does European climate policy have on German foreign direct investment?
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 201 European climate policy
European climate policy aims to implement the legally binding international 
treaties of the UN Climate Change Conference at the European level.  These are 
mainly the result of the Kyoto Protocol, which was adopted in 2005, and its successor, 
the Paris Agreement, which entered into force in 2018.  European climate policy is 
based on two pillars which together aim to ensure that, by 2050, emissions of man-
made greenhouse gases do not exceed greenhouse gas absorption in the territory of 
the  The first pillar is the   which covers manufacturing, electricity generation .EU EU ,ETS
and intra-European aviation plus, since 2024, maritime transport. The second pillar is 
based on European effort sharing. It applies to all sectors that are not subject to the  EU
 Under this pillar, the  sets out mitigation targets for each Member State, which .ETS EU
national governments must implement under their own responsibility.
The EU ETS was introduced in all EEA countries in 2005 and has been continuously 
reformed since then.  The first reform package, which launched phase 2 and entered 
into force in 2008, mainly provided relief for industry compared with phase 1. For 
instance, it has since then been permissible to offset emissions in the  against EEA
emissions reductions in third countries. In April 2009, the European Commission 
adopted further substantial reforms of European emissions trading. These entered into 
force in 2013 and heralded phase 3 of the  Emissions Trading System   phase EU (EUETS
3). These reforms involved significant changes: 1.) Since 2013, a cap on greenhouse gas 
emissions has applied throughout the  for the first time. 2.) Emissions allowances EEA
are subject to a diminishing cap and must, by default, be bought through auctions. In 
previous years, enterprises were for the most part allocated allowances free of charge. 
3.) Since then, relief for particularly emissions-intensive sectors has no longer been 
based on the historical emissions of the individual plant. Instead, the most efficient 
production facilities in the sector serve as the benchmark.  In addition, with phase 3, 
European emissions trading was widened to include not just carbon dioxide emissions 
but also other greenhouse gases such as nitrous oxide. Their climate impact is 
converted into carbon equivalents. The terms greenhouse gas emissions and carbon  2) 
 3) 
2 Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Protocol  and Conference of the ( ) CMP
Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement ( ). CMA
3 The average emissions of the most efficient 10% of plants in a sector are used as the benchmark.

What impact does European climate policy have on German foreign direct investment?
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 21emissions are used interchangeably from now on. A further reform package was 
adopted in 2018 and culminated in phase 4   phase 4). One major innovation (EUETS
introduced as part of phase 4, which entered into force in 2021, is the 2.2% annual 
reduction in allowance issuance since that year. Previously, this annual reduction factor 
had been 1.74%.  The latest reforms were adopted in April 2023 as part of the Fit for 
55 package. They incorporated maritime transport into the existing   and EUETS
established a separate emissions trading system for the buildings sector and road 
transport as well as the carbon border adjustment system for imports from countries 
outside the  which is described below.,EEA
Prices for emissions allowances rose dramatically in 2021 from around €30 initially 
to more than €80 per tonne at the end of the year.  This suggests that the innovations 
have had a binding effect and have significantly increased the effective cost of 
greenhouse gas emissions. In addition to the reduced supply, factors are likely to have 
been the recovery of the European economy in 2021 following the sharp slump in 2020 
and the resulting increase in demand for emissions allowances.
 4) 
 5) 
4 See Directive  2018/410.()EU
5 See Council of the European Union (2023).

What impact does European climate policy have on German foreign direct investment?
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 222 Debate on attractiveness of locations and German 
foreign direct investment
The European Union aims for the transition to a green economy, the European 
Green Deal, to be effected primarily through market-based mechanisms.  This 
implies that the price of greenhouse gas emissions will have to rise noticeably over the 
next few years. The price of allowances to emit greenhouse gases are unlikely to come 
back down until low-emissions technologies are available on a large scale and at low 
cost. However, if prices are not raised globally, or if they are raised by less elsewhere 
than within enterprises’ own jurisdiction, there are incentives for them to relocate their 
production abroad and to manufacture there at a still high or even higher intensity of 
emissions. This is especially true of energy-intensive enterprises that emit above 
average amounts of carbon. However, the targeted reduction in greenhouse gases will 
then only take place within the scope of European climate policy and not globally. 
European climate policy would be less effective or, in the worst case, even 
counterproductive (carbon leakage).
Previous studies on the question of whether European climate policy has influenced 
German enterprises’ decisions on where to locate production and changed 
Germany's direct investment relations with other countries do not yield clear 
results.  Koch and Basse Mama (2019), for instance, find no evidence to support the 
theory that the introduction of emissions trading in the  countries in 2005 EEA
encouraged German foreign direct investment in countries outside the scope of these 
rules. Böschemeier and Jochem (2024), however, find that the effective cost of carbon 
emissions abroad is indeed a criterion when choosing where to locate direct 
investment enterprises, especially for firms with high energy costs and high 
competitive pressure.

What impact does European climate policy have on German foreign direct investment?
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 233 Impact of European emissions trading on German 
outward foreign direct investment
The manufacturing sector accounts for a major share of German greenhouse gas 
emissions, is not necessarily tied to Germany as a location and may be sensitive to 
changes in the global carbon price structure.  In 2023, the manufacturing sector 
accounted for 16% of German greenhouse gas emissions. It thus took third place 
among the economic sectors. The energy sector emitted most greenhouse gases (30%), 
followed by transportation (22%). The buildings sector accounted for 15% of German 
greenhouse gas emissions, while agriculture was responsible for 9%.
A look at the regional distribution of German outward foreign direct investment 
shows that countries outside the EEA have attracted more German equity capital in 
the manufacturing sector in recent years.  At the end of 2005, the share of equity 
capital in manufacturing that was invested outside the  stood at 52%. At the end of EEA
2022, it was 68%.  On a geometric average of the years 2005 to 2022, the volume of 
equity capital that German direct investment firms in the manufacturing sector 
invested in non-  countries rose by 10% per year; the corresponding growth rate in EEA
 countries was only 5%. These figures could point to a gradual relocation of German EEA
industrial capacity, though this cannot simply be attributed to European climate policy. 
In actual fact, decisions on foreign direct investment are made based on a whole range 
of considerations. In order to make statements about causal relationships, it is 
therefore necessary to examine how individual enterprises react to specific changes.
Detailed datasets that extend up to the end of 2022 allow an analysis at the level of 
individual German enterprises of the extent to which the EU ETS has already 
influenced the level and structure of German foreign direct investment in third 
countries.  The study evaluates the global greenhouse gas emissions of German 
enterprises at group level.  This means that the emissions of all corporate units within 
the group worldwide are recorded and aggregated. This information can be linked to 
the Bundesbank’s Microdatabase Direct investment  This allows an analysis to be ( ). MiDi 6) 
 7) 
 8) 
6 See Federal Environment Agency (2023).
7 German foreign direct investment in the form of equity capital amounted to €1,743 billion in 2022, with the 
manufacturing sector accounting for €526 billion of this total.
8 The data are provided by Institutional Shareholder Services :  ()ISS ISS .ESG

What impact does European climate policy have on German foreign direct investment?
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 24carried out at the level of individual German enterprises as to whether the current cap 
on the volume of permissible emissions in the  has already changed the level and EEA
structure of German foreign direct investment in third countries.
The introduction of the EU ETS and subsequent reforms of the emissions trading 
system have so far had no demonstrable impact on German firms’ outward foreign 
direct investment.  However, even at the time the   was launched, manufacturing EUETS
groups with high greenhouse gas emissions were already more strongly represented 
with affiliates in non-European countries than enterprises with comparatively lower 
emissions.  It appears that energy-intensive enterprises already had a preference to 
produce in countries with lower energy prices before the   was initiated. It is also EUETS
conceivable that these enterprises built up production capacities abroad early on in 
anticipation of the   On balance, the adjustments made in 2008 tended to make EU .ETS
the   less onerous, so they are unlikely to have provided an additional incentive to EUETS
relocate production. According to empirical studies conducted by the Bundesbank, the 
 9) 
9 As  emissions data are only available from 2012, statements for earlier years can only be made on the basis ISS
of the emissions data of 2012. The  contains direct investment data from 1999 onwards. MiDi

What impact does European climate policy have on German foreign direct investment?
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 25reforms of the   in 2013 and 2021 did not induce any significant response in EUETS
terms of German outward foreign direct investment (see supplementary information 
“How do reforms strengthening the  Emissions Trading System affect German EU
foreign direct investment?”).
 10) 
10 This could also be because energy-intensive enterprises used to receive a large proportion of the required 
emissions allowances free of charge. The cap therefore did not necessarily result in higher production costs. 
See Koch and Basse Mama (2019).

What impact does European climate policy have on German foreign direct investment?
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 26Supplementary information
How do reforms strengthening the  Emissions EU
Trading System affect German foreign direct 
investment?
The following analysis explores the direct impact of the EU ETS on German outward 
foreign direct investment ();FDI  it finds no significant evidence that European 
climate policy has already led to enterprises relocating production to countries 
outside the .EEA  The introduction of the   and subsequent reforms are not yet EUETS
having a noticeable effect on German  That said, particularly emissions-intensive .FDI
firms were already holding higher  stocks in non-  countries when emissions FDI EEA
trading began than enterprises with lower greenhouse gas emissions.
This exercise builds on two sets of microdata that are linked in a way that sheds 
light on entrepreneurial decisions at the German group level.  The first dataset is the 
Bundesbank’s  which provides data on German Microdatabase Direct investment ( ), MiDi
enterprises’ stocks of outward foreign direct investment. The estimation uses the 
equity capital of German firms in all areas of economic activity whose foreign affiliates 
are active in manufacturing. This metric provides the clearest indication if firms 
relocate their production to avoid emissions or investment costs. The  database MiDi
also provides information on the German parent company’s turnover. This variable is 
used to control for the size of an enterprise. The second dataset is the  database ESG
operated by Institutional Shareholder Services  which contains data on (),ISS
greenhouse gas emissions at the group level – that is, aggregated across all corporate 
units worldwide. The analysis uses Scope 1 emissions in terms of carbon equivalents of 
all the greenhouse gases recorded.  The exercises presented below exploit two 
samples (2011‑14 and 2019‑22), each for 82 countries and 22 areas of manufacturing 
activity.
The study distinguishes between German enterprises with higher than average and 
lower than average emissions.  The base year for grouping enterprises by emissions 
intensity is 2012 – that is, the year before the 2013 reform entered into force and phase  1) 
1 Scope 1 emissions are greenhouse gas emissions that the reporting entity owns and controls itself. They do 
not include the emissions of upstream supply chains and downstream consumers.

What impact does European climate policy have on German foreign direct investment?
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 273 of the   began. In a first step, all enterprises with foreign affiliates in EUETS
manufacturing are considered as a whole and classified to a group with higher than 
average or to a group with lower than average emissions.  In a second step, this 
distinction is made separately for each two-digit economic activity in  2. The NACE
various areas of activity differ significantly in terms of their mean greenhouse gas 
emissions. If the focus of interest lies on the different adjustments comparable 
enterprises have made in response to European climate policy, it can be worth 
conducting a sector-specific analysis.
A panel regression is used to test whether enterprises whose carbon emissions are 
higher than average generally have higher FDI stocks than those with 
comparatively low emissions.  The analysis only considers  stocks (\(fdi\)) in non-  FDI EEA
countries because the   is in force throughout the  meaning that the same EUETS ,EEA
framework conditions as in Germany are in operation there. Furthermore, it explores 
whether the  stocks increased in the first two years of phase 3 of the   (\(post_ FDI EUETS
{2012}\)) compared with the two years beforehand and whether enterprises with high 
levels of carbon intensity (\(high\)) particularly stood out in this regard. This could 
provide indications that production might have been relocated owing to higher costs.
The estimation is carried out in the form of a panel estimate with fixed effects that 
capture all the sector-specific developments on the German side.  Two-digit  2 NACE
codes are used to classify enterprises to different areas of activity. Moreover, the 
exercise controls for the size of German enterprises as measured by their annual 
turnover (\(turnover\)). To account for possible serial correlation, a variance-covariance 
matrix with clusters is estimated across each individual enterprise.
The estimation equation of the analysis reads as follows:
$$ fdi_{i,t} = \alpha \cdot high_i + \beta \cdot post_{2012} + \gamma \cdot (post_{2012} 
\cdot high_i) + \delta \cdot turnover_{i,t} + sector_j + \varepsilon_{i,t} $$
where \(i\) = enterprise, \(j\) = economic sector of the German parent company and \(t\) 
= time. The variables \(fdi\) and \(turnover\) are fed into the estimation as logarithms, 
while \(high\) and \(post_{2012}\) are binary variables that can take a value of zero or 
one. 2) 
2 This approach constitutes a simplification to some degree because no distinction is made regarding the extent 
to which the individual groups, and their greenhouse gas emissions, do indeed fall within the scope of the   EUETS
and how high the share of emissions allowances allocated free of charge may be. A distinction of that kind, 
desirable as it may be, cannot be made because the greenhouse gas emissions in the  database are only ISS
available at the group level.

What impact does European climate policy have on German foreign direct investment?
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 28Enterprises with comparatively high greenhouse gas emissions held significantly 
higher outward FDI stocks in non- EEA countries during the 2011‑14 observation 
period, but the reforms of phase 3 of the EU ETS had no impact on this.  That can be 
deduced from the results presented in the upper left-hand corner of Chart 2.4. These 
results demonstrate that the observed  stocks of German enterprises did not FDI
change significantly in the years after the   entered phase 3, and apply to high- EUETS
emissions and low-emissions enterprises in equal measure.
Further reforms in phase 4 of the EU ETS were adopted in March 2018 and entered 
into force on 1 January 2021.  These notably envisaged stronger reductions in the 
volume of emissions permitted each year. Following the approach outlined above, the 
estimation examines whether this adjustment left a mark on German outward  in FDI
2021 and 2022 compared with 2019 and 2020.
Emissions-intensive German enterprises were holding higher than average amounts 
of equity capital in non-European countries both in the years before and after the 


What impact does European climate policy have on German foreign direct investment?
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 29start of phase 4 of European emissions trading.  As with the phase 3 reforms eight 
years previously, the new rules governing allowance trading have had no significant 
effects (see top-right hand corner of Chart 2.4).
Classifying enterprises by greenhouse gas emissions within their respective 
economic sector produces a somewhat different picture.  Ranking enterprises within 
their particular activity enables us to compare firms facing similar challenges as the 
energy transition unfolds. This exercise begins by breaking down manufacturing 
enterprises by economic activity based on their two-digit  2 code. After that, a NACE
distinction can be made within these activities between enterprises with above average 
greenhouse gas emissions and those with below average greenhouse gas emissions.
This sector-specific perspective reveals that there was no demonstrable difference 
between high-emissions and low-emissions enterprises in terms of FDI in non- EEA 
countries between 2011 and 2014.  While the relevant coefficient is positive again in 
this estimation, the dispersion across the  stocks of the individual enterprises within FDI
an area of economic activity was so high that it is not possible to draw any statistically 
significant conclusions (see the lower left-hand corner of Chart 2.4). In this analysis, the 
general increase in German outward  in non-  countries after 2012 is now slightly FDI EEA
positively significant, but this development was unrelated to the emissions intensity of 
individual enterprises.
Following the introduction of phase 3 of the EU ,ETS enterprises engaged primarily 
in the EEA reduced their greenhouse gas emissions by more than those with high 
outward FDI stocks in non- EEA countries.  Unlike in the four-year period either side of 
the introduction of phase 3 of the   higher than average greenhouse gas EU ,ETS
emissions within an area of economic activity in the 2019‑22 observation period 
correlated significantly with higher than average outward  stocks in non-  FDI EEA
countries (see the lower right-hand corner of Chart 2.4). A comparison of the 
underlying microdata shows that this shift was driven by different developments in 
greenhouse gas emissions during phase 3 of the  : enterprises with high  EUETS FDI
stocks within the  reduced greenhouse gas emissions by more than those with high EEA
 stocks in non-  countries, especially from 2016 onwards. FDI EEA

What impact does European climate policy have on German foreign direct investment?
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 30Empirical studies suggest that European emissions trading may have caused firms 
within the EEA to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions.  Overall, German 
enterprises have continually reduced their greenhouse gas emissions since 2015. By 
contrast, the greenhouse gas emissions of German firms with direct investment 
locations in the manufacturing sector rose steadily until mid-2018, only then 
experiencing a marked decline (see Chart 2.5). This discrepancy is solely attributable to 
firms with high foreign direct investment outside the  Firms that operated .EEA
predominantly within the  with their affiliates were already emitting less EEA
greenhouse gas from 2016 onwards compared with previous years. One possible 
explanation could be that they increased their investment in emissions-reducing 
technologies. In this context, it is important to bear in mind that developments in 
greenhouse gas emissions were driven substantially by only a few large companies.
This finding suggests that European climate policy is capable of reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions within its area of jurisdiction.  Other studies investigating 
the greenhouse gas emissions of individual firms participating in the   confirm EUETS
this hypothesis. Colmer et al. (2024) estimate that the   caused the affected EUETS
French firms to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions by around 15% – without 
cutting their production at the same time. Böning et al. (2023) come to a somewhat 
more critical conclusion. While the authors confirm that companies that fall within the 
scope of the   cut their greenhouse gas emissions in relation to the volume of EUETS
goods produced, they also find evidence of some carbon leakages, as this reduction 
was counterbalanced by an intensification of emissions outside the .EU


What impact does European climate policy have on German foreign direct investment?
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 31Future capacity relocations by German enterprises due to international divergences 
in emissions costs cannot be ruled out.  When phase 4 of the   was launched, EUETS
the available emissions allowances became so scarce that the price for emitting one 
tonne of carbon rose to over €50 for the first time in May 2021, thus becoming a 
relevant cost factor. However, production relocations also entail costs and are not 
always feasible for each and every production process. The incentives for taking such a 
step are therefore likely to diminish to the extent that innovative technology helps to 
reduce emissions cost-effectively. 11) 
11 According to a survey conducted by the German Chamber of Commerce and Industry  more than half ( ), DIHK
of large industrial firms plan to reduce their domestic production or relocate it abroad because of high energy 
prices. See German Chamber of Industry and Commerce (2024).

What impact does European climate policy have on German foreign direct investment?
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 324 Climate policy and international competitiveness
Theoretical considerations suggest that a European climate policy that makes 
carbon prices higher than in the rest of the world could affect the international 
competitiveness of firms located here.  This would be the case if, in other parts of the 
world, the external costs of climate change were not internalised to the same extent, or 
indeed at all, enabling firms outside Europe to produce at lower cost.
The best solution for limiting greenhouse gas emissions worldwide is a coordinated 
climate policy aimed at establishing a uniform carbon price in as many countries as 
possible across the globe.  This is the objective of the annual United Nations climate 
conferences. Such a policy would also help to maintain the competitiveness of firms 
producing in Europe. It could prevent greenhouse gas emissions from being relocated 
to places where they are not priced at all, or only to a limited extent. In today’s 
geopolitically fragmented environment, however, it is questionable whether 
negotiating global carbon prices is possible.
As a second-best solution, the EU therefore decided to impose a carbon price on 
imports from countries outside the .EEA  This is implemented via the carbon border 
adjustment mechanism  a tool intended to protect domestic producers from ( ), CBAM
potential emissions-related competitive disadvantages in relation to foreign suppliers 
and, at the same time, provide incentives for them to keep their own production in the 
country. The  entered into force in October 2023, but allows a transitional period. CBAM
This is deemed necessary because the  entails extensive reporting requirements CBAM
for importers, which pose serious challenges for small and medium-sized enterprises in 
particular.  Only from 2026 onwards will certain energy-intensive products be subject 
to gradual carbon pricing in line with their embedded emissions upon importation into 
the  However, in accordance with the statutes of the World Trade Organization .EEA (
 a prerequisite for this measure is that the relevant industries in Europe no ), WTO
longer receive any emissions allowances free of charge. The Regulation does not  12) 
 13) 
 14) 
12 See Hassler et al. (2021).
13 See German Chamber of Commerce and Industry (2023). In a joint statement, the Federation of German 
Industries and the German Chamber of Commerce and Industry have also called for a permanent 
simplification of the requirements for declaring greenhouse gas emissions embedded in imported goods. See 
Federation of German Industries and German Chamber of Commerce and Industry (2024).
14 See Regulation  2023/956.()EU

What impact does European climate policy have on German foreign direct investment?
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 33contain any provisions on exports from the  to third countries that must compete EEA
with suppliers not subject to comparable costs.  Consequently, the  does not CBAM
entirely eliminate the incentives for relocation. 15) 
 16) 
15 Recital (65) of Regulation  2023/956 provides only for an evaluation of possible practices of ()EU
circumvention, which should also include exports: “The Commission should regularly evaluate the application 
of this Regulation and report to the European Parliament and to the Council. […] Those reports should also 
contain an assessment of the impact of the  on carbon leakage, including in relation to exports, and its CBAM
economic, social and territorial impact throughout the Union, […]”.
16 See Marcu et al. (2022).

What impact does European climate policy have on German foreign direct investment?
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 34Supplementary information
Higher domestic carbon prices in the  model can EMuSe
contribute to raising imports of emissions-intensive 
intermediate inputs.
The environmental multi-sectoral ( ) EMuSe  model developed at the Bundesbank 
(Hinterlang et al. (2023)) can be used to visualise the impact of a carbon pricing 
regime introduced in Europe with and without a carbon border adjustment 
mechanism ( ) CBAM  on imports of intermediate inputs.  The results can provide 
indications of whether German enterprises are using foreign direct investment  to ()FDI
produce more emissions-intensive intermediate goods abroad before importing them, 
thus potentially circumventing comparatively high emissions costs in Germany. The 
multi-region version of the model developed by Ernst et al. (2023) is used here to 
explore this question.
EMuSe  is a three-region macroeconomic model with a multi-sector production 
structure.  In addition to key economic variables such as output, consumption and 
investment, it includes climate-related variables like carbon emissions. The three 
regions covered by the model are Germany, Europe (excluding Germany), and the rest 
of the world (excluding Europe).  It is calibrated in line with Hinterlang (2024). Eleven 
economic activities are modelled on the production side.  These vary in terms of their 
size, their use of capital, labour and intermediate inputs, and their emission intensities 
during production. Firms are able to buy emissions abatement technologies in each 
period and do so depending on the carbon price and abatement costs. As a result of 
the high global carbon emissions and thus the mounting level of carbon in the  1) 
 2) 
1 For the purposes of this analysis, Europe means the 27 countries of the European Union plus Norway, 
Switzerland and the United Kingdom. All these countries are part of the  Emissions Trading System   or EU (EU )ETS
have implemented comparable systems.
2 The eleven sectors are as follows: agriculture, forestry and fishing (A), manufacturing activities that fall within 
the scope of the  (C ) or outside the scope of the  (C ), mining and quarrying, manufacture of coke ETSETSETSNETS
and refined petroleum products, energy supply (B, C19, D), water supply (E), construction (F), wholesale and 
retail trade, transportation and storage outside the scope of the  accommodation and food service activities ,ETS
(G, H , I), transportation within the scope of the  (H ), information and communication (J), professional, NETSETSETS
scientific and technical activities (M, N), and other economic service activities (R, S). Under this approach, the C  ETS
aggregate includes the manufacture of paper and paper products (C17), of chemicals and chemical products 
(C20), of other non-metallic mineral products (C23), and of basic metals (C24).

What impact does European climate policy have on German foreign direct investment?
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 351.  
2.  atmosphere, climate change causes damage that reduces productivity. Carbon pricing 
is the main instrument of market-based climate policymaking. It can be introduced 
either directly via a carbon tax or indirectly by setting the total volume of permissible 
emissions (see also Deutsche Bundesbank (2022, 2024)). We simulate two policy 
scenarios in the model:
Europe imposes a carbon price.
Europe imposes a carbon price plus a carbon border adjustment mechanism. 
That includes a carbon border adjustment tax levied on imports from the rest of 
the world, while exports are exempt from the carbon price.
Based on  (2022), our assumption here is that the carbon price increases roughly NGFS
25-fold over the 2020 carbon price up to the year 2050, before declining again and 
remaining constant at 13 times its original level (Net Zero scenario). The carbon price 
applies throughout Europe to all economic activities. Border adjustment taxes are 
levied at the domestic carbon price on the estimated emissions content of imports from 
the rest of the world.
If Europe introduces carbon pricing, all European regions suffer aggregate 
economic losses initially.  They do recoup those losses over time, however. Chart 2.6 
shows the effects on selected variables in the three regions. These losses come about 
because production costs increase and products become more expensive relative to 
those from the rest of the world. Higher prices reduce real income and demand, 
because consumption falls. At the same time, emissions decline as a result of the 
increased carbon price. As a consequence, the economic damage diminishes worldwide 
because global productivity goes up. The rest of the world, where carbon is not priced, 
benefits over the medium to long term from falling emissions and positive trade 
effects. Some of the carbon emissions cut domestically are relocated abroad (carbon 
leakage). In the short term, however, the income effect prevails because value added 
falls slightly in the rest of the world as well. 3) 
3 As things currently stand, exporters are not yet reimbursed under the European carbon border adjustment 
mechanism for emission allowances they pay for. An arrangement to that effect may, however, be added to a 
future regulation, which would boost the international competitiveness of resident enterprises. In the model, 
the effective carbon price is reduced according to each sector’s share of exports, which brings the model close 
to an ideal scenario.

What impact does European climate policy have on German foreign direct investment?
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 36

What impact does European climate policy have on German foreign direct investment?
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 37


What impact does European climate policy have on German foreign direct investment?
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 38A carbon price has a particularly negative impact on the comparatively carbon-
intensive activities that also fall within the scope of the EU Emissions Trading 
System (EU )ETS  (see Chart 2.7). These include energy (B, C19, D) as well as certain 
manufacturing (C ) and transportation (H ) activities. The carbon border ETS ETS
adjustment mechanism changes the trade effects only marginally, given that the 
resulting relative price increase for foreign goods is rather small. It reduces carbon 
leakage but does not prevent it (see also Ernst et al. (2023) for a detailed discussion). 
Domestic carbon-intensive activities benefit more than clean activities from the carbon 
border adjustment mechanism.
Imports of intermediate inputs rise over the medium to long term as a result of the 
carbon price. This is because domestic products become more expensive in relative 
terms, meaning that they tend to be purchased abroad.  Hence, in as far as German 
enterprises build up production capacities abroad to carry on sourcing certain 
intermediate goods cheaply (from abroad instead of domestically as hitherto), German 
 rises as a result of the carbon price. This is notably the case for emissions-intensive FDI
activities such as energy (B, C19, D) and manufacturing activities that fall within the 
scope of the   (C ). Imports of intermediate inputs are seen to decline in the EUETSETS
short term as aggregate output is lowered by the higher carbon prices. Demand for 
intermediate inputs declines accordingly across the entire production range, and thus 
 4) 

What impact does European climate policy have on German foreign direct investment?
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 39in absolute terms.  But because imports of intermediate inputs fall less strongly than 
output, their percentage share increases already in the short term. From around 2050, 
output picks up again on the back of productivity gains made possible by the reduced 
damage caused by emissions. Furthermore, consistent with the ’s Net Zero NGFS
scenario, we assume that the carbon price follows a downward path after 2050. At the 
same time, the ratio of imports of intermediate inputs to output declines because the 
uptake of domestic intermediate inputs rises again.
The carbon border adjustment mechanism reduces and delays this effect because it 
makes intermediate inputs from the rest of the world more expensive by imposing 
a levy on imports.  For domestic enterprises, this reduces the incentive to source 
intermediate products from abroad. However, owing to the increase in the cost of 
imports, the carbon border adjustment mechanism causes an additional distortion: 
because product prices go up overall, real income and output both go down. Nor can 
the mechanism fully offset the competitive disadvantages even if, as assumed here, 
exports are exempted from carbon pricing because, as hitherto, carbon pricing is 
limited to goods and services that are brought to market in Europe or produced there. 
For this reason, the effect of the carbon border adjustment mechanism on macro 
aggregates is comparatively small. 4) 
4 This means that the income effect (less output = less demand for intermediate inputs) predominates in the 
short term and the substitution effect (intermediate inputs from abroad relatively cheaper) prevails in the 
medium to long term.

What impact does European climate policy have on German foreign direct investment?
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 40

What impact does European climate policy have on German foreign direct investment?
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 41


What impact does European climate policy have on German foreign direct investment?
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 42The Bundesbank’s EMuSe  model can simulate the effects of carbon pricing and the 
. CBAM  Since the  did not enter into force until October last year and also allows CBAM
transitional periods, it is not yet possible to empirically evaluate its effects on economic 
activity and greenhouse gas emissions. These can be simulated, however. To achieve 
this, the Bundesbank uses its environmental multi-sectoral  model. It can map ( ) EMuSe
various regions (here: Germany, Rest of Europe, Rest of world) and sectors and 
illustrate the impact of rising carbon costs on greenhouse gas emissions and key 
economic indicators.
The model finds that, viewed in isolation, rising carbon costs in Europe lead to a 
decline in global greenhouse gas emissions, but adversely affect international 
competitiveness here.  According to the simulation, this will lead in the medium term 
to firms importing more intermediate goods instead of producing them domestically. 
The model does not capture whether firms acquire these goods from their own foreign 
affiliates or from third-party suppliers.
The CBAM  is able to address this loss of international competitiveness effectively; in 
its current form, however, it does not fully compensate for the competitive 
disadvantages faced by European firms.  This is because – unlike in the simulation 
presented here – exports from the  fall within the scope of the   and compete EEA EUETS
on the world market with products from third countries. The  is less effective than CBAM
a globally coordinated climate policy in limiting worldwide greenhouse gas emissions, 
too. Outside the  the costs of climate change are left largely unaccounted for; here, ,EEA
only products manufactured in the  tend to become more expensive.EEA
Framework conditions that encourage innovation in low-emissions technologies are 
crucial to effective climate policy.  Carbon pricing is itself likely to have certain 
incentivising effects on innovation, from which the model abstracts. Other factors such 
as swift approval procedures and a clear economic policy strategy are also key in 
ensuring planning certainty for firms. Above all, particularly innovative start-ups are 
also likely to benefit from advances in the European capital markets union, which 
promises improved access to European venture capital and reduced reliance on non-
resident investors, especially from the United States. 17) 
 18) 
 19) 
17 See Hinterlang et al. (2023).
18 See Hasna et al. (2023).
19 See European Central Bank (2024).

What impact does European climate policy have on German foreign direct investment?
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 435 Conclusion
To date, European climate policy has not yet led to widespread relocations of 
energy-intensive production abroad by domestic firms.  Nonetheless, there are 
indications that international groups reduced greenhouse gas emissions more sharply 
within the  than in countries outside the scope of the   Should carbon pricing EEA EU .ETS
remain significantly higher in Europe than in the rest of the world on a lasting basis, 
this could create incentives for increased relocations of particularly emissions-intensive 
production processes to countries with less ambitious climate policies.
An internationally coordinated climate policy would counteract such circumvention.  
However, efforts to persuade as many countries as possible to make binding 
commitments have met with considerable difficulties. It is therefore questionable 
whether this route alone will be sufficient to achieve the objectives set out at the 
international climate change conferences in Kyoto and Paris.
The CBAM  is a suitable tool for avoiding carbon leakage, but it is less efficient in 
terms of achieving global climate targets.  This is because, ultimately, only goods 
brought to market in the  are subject to carbon pricing. Furthermore, European EEA
producers would remain at a disadvantage on the world market, as they would have to 
compete with suppliers not obliged to compensate for greenhouse gas emissions. 
Finally, the  entails a not insubstantial bureaucratic burden for European CBAM
importers, as they have to provide comprehensive declarations of imported goods.
From a regulatory perspective, policymakers at the German and European levels 
should strive to facilitate innovation in green technologies by ensuring suitable 
framework conditions and thus incentivise investment from both international and 
domestic sources.  Ideally, costly subsidies could then be avoided, and private capital 
could be mobilised instead. The prerequisites for this are planning security, swift 
approval procedures and a deep, harmonised capital market.

What impact does European climate policy have on German foreign direct investment?
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 446 List of references
Böning , J., V. Di Nino and T. Folger (2023), Benefits and costs of the  in the  a ETS ,EU
lesson learned for the  design,  Working Paper Series No 2764. CBAM ECB
Böschemeier , J. and A. (2024), The effect of foreign carbon prices on German Jochem 
outward  Economics Letters, Vol. 234, 111499.,FDI
Colmer, J., R. Martin, M. Muûls and U. J. Wagner (2024), Does Pricing Carbon Mitigate 
Climate Change? Firm-Level Evidence from the European Union Emissions Trading 
System, Review of Economic Studies, 1‑40.
Council of the European Union (2023), 'Fit for 55': Council adopts key pieces of 
legislation delivering on 2030 climate targets, press release of 25 April 2023.
Deutsche Bundesbank  (2024), Energy efficiency improvements: implications for carbon 
emissions and economic output in Germany, Monthly Report, April 2024.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022), Climate change and climate policy: analytical 
requirements and options from a central bank perspective, Monthly Report, January 
2022.
Directive  2018/410 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 March ()EU
2018 amending Directive 2003/87/  to enhance cost-effective emission reductions and EC
low-carbon investments, and Decision  2015/1814.()EU
Ernst , A., N. , A. and N. (2023), Carbon Pricing, Border Hinterlang Mahle Stähler 
Adjustment and Climate Clubs: Options for International Cooperation, Journal of 
International Economics, Vol. 144 (C), 103772.
European Central Bank (2024), Financial Integration and Structure in the Euro Area, 
Frankfurt am Main.
Federal Environment Agency (2023), Climate emissions fall by 10.1 per cent in 
2023 – biggest decline since 1990, annex " Sektoren Emissionsübersichten -KSG
1990‑2023", press release of 15 March 2023.

What impact does European climate policy have on German foreign direct investment?
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 45Federation of German Industries and German Chamber of Commerce and Industry 
(2024), Implementierung des CO2-Grenzausgleichsmechanismus: Bürokratie und 
Herausforderungen für die deutsche Wirtschaft , statement, May 2024.
German Chamber of Commerce and Industry (2024), Energiewende-Barometer 2024 
der -IHK Organisation: Umdenken ist erforderlich.
German Chamber of Commerce and Industry (2023), - DIHK Stellungnahme: Umsetzung 
des ‘ EU CO₂-Grenzausgleichsmechanismus‘  ( ). CBAM
Hasna, Z., F. Jaumotte, J. Kim, S. Pienknagura and G. (2023), Green Schwerhoff 
Innovation and Diffusion: Policies to Accelerate Them and Expected Impact on 
Macroeconomic and Firm-Level Performance,  Staff Discussion Note 2023/008.IMF
Hassler, J., P. Krusell and C. Olovsson (2021), Suboptimal Climate Policy, Journal of the 
European Economic Association, Vol. 19(6), 2895‑2928.
Hinterlang , N. (2024), Different effects of carbon pricing and border adjustment in 
Germany and Spain, Economic Modelling, Vol. 141, 106840.
Hinterlang , N., A. Martin, O. , N. and J. (2023), The Environmental Röhe Stähler Strobel 
Multi-Sector  model : A technical documentation, Bundesbank Technical DSGE EMuSe
Paper No 03/2023.
Koch , N. and H. Basse Mama (2019), Does the  Emissions Trading System induce EU
investment leakage? Evidence from German multinational firms, Energy Economics, 
Vol. 81, 479‑492.
Marcu, A., M. , A. Cosbey and A. Maratou (2022), Border Carbon Adjustment in Mehling
the : Treatment of Exports in the  European Roundtable on Climate Change EU , CBAM
and Sustainable Transition.
NGFS  (2022),  Climate Scenarios Database, Technical Report September 2022, NGFS
Network of Central Banks and Supervisors for Greening the Financial System.
Regulation  2023/956 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 10 May ()EU
2023 establishing a carbon border adjustment mechanism.

46The performance of 
German credit 
institutions in 2023
Monthly Report – September 2024

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 47German credit institutions’ performance improved significantly in 2023.  At €48.7 billion, 
aggregate profit for the financial year before tax was almost 80% higher than the 
previous year’s figure. All of the categories of banks considered posted higher profits 
for the 2023 financial year than they had done in 2022. In a long-term comparison, the 
aggregate profit for the financial year before tax reached its highest level since the 
start of the reporting period for the profit and loss statistics in 1999. 
This development was driven by a significant increase in net interest income, which 
rose by 16.7% compared with the previous year, in particular as a result of the 
Eurosystem’s key interest rate hikes, and reached its highest level in absolute terms 
(€106.9 billion) in 25 years. This widened the interest margin of German banks 
considerably, although – at 1.00% in 2023 – it remained below its long-term average of 
1.09%. In addition, the trading result (+18.4%) and other operating result (+359.7%) 
showed strong increases. In absolute terms they remain of minor significance, though. 
Net commission income for 2023 was around the same level as the two previous years 
and so did not contribute to the increase in profit for the financial year.
Net valuation charges sank by slightly over one-third in the reporting year, to €10.3 
billion. Unlike in the previous year, they thus amounted to well below the long-term 
average. In 2023, write-downs on fixed-income securities, in particular, were much 
lower than they had been in the preceding year. In addition, German credit institutions 
started to see reversals of impairment losses on securities which had been written 
down in the previous year due to the higher interest rate level.
Measured by the return on assets and the cost/income ratio, the profitability as well as 
the cost efficiency of German banks improved considerably. At 0.46%, the return on 
assets reached a 25-year high in the year under review. The sharp rise in operating 
income resulted in the lowest cost/income ratio in 25 years, at 59.2%, even though 
administrative spending increased (+2.4%).
However, factors that act as a drag on earnings are likely to gain in significance for 
German banks in the current year. In the face of geopolitical risks and persistent 
uncertainty about macroeconomic developments, the underlying economic conditions 
remain challenging. With new lending still subdued and sight deposits being shifted 
into better-remunerated time deposits, it is to be expected that the effects on net 
interest income will tend to be negative overall. In addition, further increases in 
counterparty credit risk render higher write-downs for non-performing loans more 
likely.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 481 Business environment and structural developments in 
the German banking sector
The year 2023 found German institutions operating in a difficult macroeconomic 
environment. The German economy was predominantly weighed down by the 
economic repercussions of Russia’s war against Ukraine, especially the sharp rise in 
energy costs, and anaemic global trade. Increased financing costs stemming from the 
Eurosystem’s continued monetary policy tightening acted as an additional drag on 
economic activity. In addition, March 2023 saw a number of  regional banks and one US
Swiss big bank experience turbulence, though this did not ultimately exert any lasting 
impact on German banks.  All in all, the German financial system proved stable in the 
macro-financial environment of 2023.
1.1 Macroeconomic setting
Price and calendar-adjusted gross domestic product fell slightly by 0.1% on the year 
in 2023. Although large order backlogs in industry and construction and easing supply 
bottlenecks had a bolstering effect, weak domestic and foreign demand and the after-
effects of the sharp rise in energy costs weighed on industry. Averaging 6% in 2023, 
inflation as measured by the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices was lower than it 
had been in the previous year (2022: 8.7%). Nevertheless, it continued to hold back 
private consumption, despite higher wages and a robust labour market.  As pandemic-
related expenditure tapered off, government consumption also declined. In addition, 
increased financing costs dampened private investment, especially in housing 
construction.
In response to high inflation rates, the Eurosystem continued tightening monetary 
policy in 2023. Key interest rates were raised six times in a row in the year under 
review, with the interest rate steps being reduced from 50 basis points to 25 basis  1) 
 2) 
 3) 
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a), p. 14.
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a), p. 81.
3 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2024a), p. 17.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 49points as the year progressed. Taken together, these increases constituted the biggest 
hike in key interest rates in the history of the Eurosystem. In September 2023, the 
interest rate on the deposit facility, which is of relevance for monetary policy, reached 
its peak at 4%. Furthermore, reinvestments of principal payments from maturing 
securities purchased under the asset purchase programme  were initially scaled ( )APP
back and were then discontinued altogether in June 2023.
A number of US regional banks and one Swiss big bank were beset by trouble in the 
year under review, though the turmoil did not leave lasting adverse effects on 
international financial markets.  It began with Silicon Valley Bank’s collapse in March 
2023, after interest rate risk and liquidity risk materialised due to severe deficits in 
management. The turmoil quickly spilled over to other  regional banks with similar US
business models and Swiss big bank Credit Suisse.  Despite a temporary bout of 
tension, these events did not have any lasting effect on the performance of 
international financial markets.  The stock markets also withstood the flagging 
economic activity and the geopolitical risks in the year under review and, amid 
fluctuations, posted gains overall. The bond markets saw mixed developments as a 
whole. Yields on medium to long-term government and corporate bonds, especially,  
fell because market participants were anticipating a global disinflation process and 
policy rate cuts. 
1.2 Balance sheet and structural developments in the German banking 
sector
The consolidation process in the German banking sector continued in 2023. As in the 
previous years, both the number of credit institutions and the number of branches 
contracted further.  Credit cooperatives accounted for more than half of the reduction 
in the number of credit institutions. Around one-third of the decline in the number of 
branches was attributable to savings banks and roughly one-third to credit 
cooperatives. However, big banks also significantly scaled back their number of 
branches once again. 4) 
 5) 
 6) 
 7) 
 8) 
 9) 
4 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2024a), p. 19.
5 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a), p. 14.
6 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b), p. 35.
7 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b), p. 35, Deutsche Bundesbank (2023c), p. 41, Deutsche Bundesbank (2023d), 
p. 38 and Deutsche Bundesbank (2024b), p. 37.
8 The total number of credit institutions fell by 56 to 1,340 in 2023, and the number of domestic branches 
declined by 944 to a total of 19,488.
9 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2024c).

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 50Category of banksNumber of 
institutions1Number of branches
1 Number of employees2
2021 2022 2023 2021 2022 2023 2021 2022 2023
All categories of banks 1,456 1,396 1,340 21,697 20,432 19,488 540,365 535,331 537,193
Commercial banks 261 247 242 5,199 4,825 4,5723
146,9003
145,7003
146,000
      Big banks 3 3 34,037 3,719 3,471 . . .
      Regional banks and 
      other commercial banks151 142 137 1,013 954 941 . . .
      Branches of foreign banks 107 102 102 149 152 160 . . .
Landesbanken 6 6 6 179 144 139 27,150 26,900 26,950
Savings banks 371 362 354 7,732 7,326 6,965 194,950 191,000 191,000
Credit cooperatives 771 735 696 7,297 6,881 6,5754
135,5004
134,5504
135,400
Mortgage banks 9 8 7 32 31 31 . . .
Building and loan associations 18 18 14 1,239 1,205 1,1865 12,900513,2005 13,050
Banks with special, 
development 
and other central support 
tasks620 20 21 19 20 207 22,9657 23,9817 24,793
1 Source: Bank office statistics, in Deutsche Bundesbank, Banking statistics, tables contained in the 
Statistical Series, IV. Structural figures, multi-office banks, p. 104. The term “credit institution” is used as in 
the Banking Act, resulting in divergences from data in the monthly balance sheet statistics and the 
statistics on the banks’ profit and loss accounts.  Number of full-time and part-time employees excluding 2
the Bundesbank. Sources: Data provided by associations and Bundesbank calculations.  Employees in 3
private banking, including mortgage banks established under private law.  Only employees whose 4
primary occupation is in banking.  Only office-based employees.  Including  Bank   Employees at 5 6 DZ .AG7
public mortgage banks (mortgage banks established under public law), banks with special tasks 
established under public law and  Bank DZ .AG
German credit institutions’ aggregate total assets for the year grew at a 
considerably slower pace than in the years from 2019 to 2022. According to the 
monthly balance sheet statistics, annual average total assets grew by 0.9% in 2023. 
Growth rates ranged between 2.9% and 7.9% in the period from 2019 to 2021. The 
sharp increase in 2022 (+12.0%), meanwhile, was largely attributable to a one-off effect 
in the balance sheet statistics concerning how derivatives are recorded.Table 3.1: Structural data on German credit institutions
End of year

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 51Looking at the various categories of banks, regional and other commercial banks (+3.
8%) and big banks (+1.6%) were foremost in posting positive growth rates compared to 
2022. By contrast, savings banks (-1.1%) and credit cooperatives (-0.5%) recorded 
negative growth rates.
On the assets side of the aggregated bank balance sheet, German banks’ deposits 
with the central bank declined in particular; growth in loans halved. According to 
data from the monthly balance sheet statistics, deposits held at the central bank fell by 
an annual average of 8.4% compared with 2022. In particular, German credit 
institutions repaid a large part of the outstanding volumes under the third series of 
targeted longer-term refinancing operations  III).  Furthermore, growth in (TLTRO
loans to domestic non-banks in 2023 was only around half the previous year’s figure, at 
3.4%. Regional and other commercial banks (+5.5%) and credit cooperatives (+4.1%) 
were the main categories to see above-average growth. Unlike in the previous year, the 
loan portfolios of savings banks exhibited below-average growth (+3.0%).
Lending to non-financial corporations, in particular, proved weak.  Longer-term loans 
continued to climb, but short-term loans were redeemed on balance.  The lacklustre 
growth was rooted in both credit supply and credit demand. The significantly increased 
lending rates and the uncertain economic outlook were the main factors dampening 
demand for loans. In terms of supply, German banks tightened their credit standards 
and their credit terms and conditions for corporate lending on balance, mainly because 
of heightened credit risk in the light of the gloomier economic situation and subdued 
economic outlook.
In addition, there was also considerably less growth in loans for house purchase to 
non-financial corporations and households.  Having been one of the main drivers of 
credit growth over the past years, loans for house purchase did not even increase half 
as strongly as they had done in the years 2020 to 2022, posting growth of +2.9% in 
2023. Savings banks and credit cooperatives, in particular, recorded heavily weakened 
growth. At +2.7%, growth in savings banks’ loans for house purchase in the reporting 
year was roughly two-thirds below the previous year’s rate. Unlike in 2022, it was also 
slightly below average, compared with the figure aggregated across all categories of 
banks. By contrast, credit cooperatives again posted above-average growth in loans for  10) 
 11) 
 12) 
10 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2024a), p. 65.
11 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2024b), p. 34, Deutsche Bundesbank (2023d), p. 34, Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2023c), p. 37 and Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b), p. 31.
12 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2024b), p. 34, Deutsche Bundesbank (2023d), pp. 34 f., Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2023c), pp. 37 ff. and Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b), pp. 31. Detailed information can be found , in the chart here
entitled “Changes in credit standards for loans to enterprises and contributing factors”.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 52house purchase in 2023. That said, the growth rate of +4.3% was still only around half 
the figure seen in the previous year.
Lending for house purchase was likewise throttled by both supply-side and demand-
side effects. Demand for loans for house purchase mainly slackened due to high 
construction prices and strongly increased financing costs.  But the supply side also 
exerted a dampening force. German banks tightened their credit standards and terms 
and conditions due to gloomier housing market prospects and heightened default risk.
On the liabilities side of the aggregated bank balance sheet, growth in deposits was 
significantly weaker in the year under review than was the case in previous years.  At 
+2.3%, the rate of growth in deposits held by domestic non-banks at German credit 
institutions averaged across 2023 was more than 1 percentage point lower than the 
previous year’s value and only equated to around half of the growth seen in 2021 and 
2020. In particular, 2023 saw a 4.5% decline in sight deposits; in the period since the 
2008‑09 global financial crisis up to 2022, sight deposits had, at times, recorded growth 
rates in double figures. The decline in savings deposits also picked up pace in 2023, 
reaching 12.7%. In absolute terms, however, this did not have so much of an impact. By 
contrast, time deposits registered exceptionally strong growth at +29.0%.
Overall, German banks’ deposit business in the reporting year was characterised by 
the reallocation of funds in an environment of rising interest rates. Inflows into 
short-term time deposits, in particular, largely corresponded with net outflows from 
overnight deposits and short-term savings deposits. The behaviour of non-financial 
corporations and households was a response to further widening in yield spreads 
between short-term time deposits remunerated at close-to-market rates and other 
short-term bank deposits.
On an average for 2023, German credit institutions’ balance sheet equity grew much 
more slowly than in the previous year. At 2.8%, the growth rate was only just over half 
of what it had been in the year before. Credit cooperatives (+5.0%) and big banks (+4.
1%) saw the most pronounced above-average increases. But growth in the balance 
sheet equity of savings banks (+3.2%) and regional and other commercial banks (+2.9%) 
was also slightly higher than the aggregate figure for all German banks. By contrast,   13) 
 14) 
 15) 
13 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2024b), p. 34, Deutsche Bundesbank (2023d), p. 35, Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2023c), p. 39 and Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b), p. 32.
14 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023d), p. 35, Deutsche Bundesbank (2023c), p. 40 and Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2023b), p. 32. Detailed information can be found , in the chart entitled “Changes in credit standards for loans here
to households for house purchase and contributing factors”.
15 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2024b), p. 33, Deutsche Bundesbank (2023d), pp. 33 f., Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2023c), pp. 37 and Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b), p. 30.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 53the balance sheet equity of mortgage banks and building and loan associations 
contracted by 5.6% and 2.6%, respectively.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 542 Performance, profitability and cost efficiency
The performance, profitability and cost efficiency of German credit institutions 
improved significantly in the year under review.  Aggregate profit for the financial 
year before tax and the return on assets both grew steeply compared with 2022, 
reaching 25-year highs.  At the same time, German banks’ cost/income ratio fell to its 
lowest level in 25 years. Furthermore, these developments were founded on a broad-
based improvement in annual results across all of the categories of banks included in 
the statistics on banks’ profit and loss accounts  (see the supplementary information 
under “ ”). This was mainly driven by the institutions’ net interest Methodological notes
income, which saw strong positive developments primarily due to the Eurosystem 
having increased key interest rates. 16) 
 17) 
16 The 25-year span corresponds to the period covered by the statistics on banks’ profit and loss accounts (profit 
and loss statistics), beginning in 1999. The data from the profit and loss statistics form the basis for the 
commentary in this article. For more information, see the supplementary information under “Methodological 
notes”.
17 Big banks, regional banks and other commercial banks, branches of foreign banks, Landesbanken, savings 
banks, credit cooperatives, mortgage banks, building and loan associations as well as banks with special, 
development and other central support tasks.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 55Supplementary information
Methodological notes
The results from the profit and loss accounts are based on the published annual 
reports of the individual institutions in accordance with the provisions set forth in 
the German Commercial Code (Handelsgesetzbuch) and the Regulation on the 
Accounting of Credit Institutions ( Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der 
Kreditinstitute ). In terms of their conception, structure and definitions, they differ from 
the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS)  for publicly traded banking 
groups. This means that – from a methodological viewpoint – business performance 
and certain balance sheet or individual profit and loss items are not comparable across 
the national and international accounting frameworks. For reasons of comparability 
within Germany, it is advisable to consider the individual accounts when analysing 
financial performance. The figures for balance sheet capital (total equity), total assets 
and other stock variables are not obtained from the annual reports but are taken as 
annual average values on the basis of the monthly balance sheet statistics reported for 
the institution as a whole.
The reporting group for profit and loss statistics includes all banks which are 
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) that conform to the definition of a credit 
institution under the Capital Requirements Regulation (CRR) as set forth in Article 4
(1) number 1 of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 and are domiciled in Germany. 
Branches of foreign banks that are exempted from the provisions of Section 53 of the 
German Banking Act ( ), banks in liquidation and banks with a Kreditwesengesetz
financial year of less than twelve months (truncated financial year) are not included in 
this performance analysis.
At the launch of monetary union in 1999, the reporting group relevant for calculating 
the money supply and for monetary analysis was uniformly defined by the European 
Central Bank for the euro area as a whole and designated as the MFI sector. Unlike the 
population of banks used for the Bundesbank’s analysis up to that point, building and 
loan associations are also included.  1) 
1 IFRS-based financial statements are of relevance, for instance, to matters of macroprudential analysis and 
oversight, concentrating on systemically important banks and their international business activities (including 
their foreign subsidiaries). For details, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2013).

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 56Except where another time period is explicitly mentioned, the calculations with 
regard to the longer-term average cover the years since the launch of monetary 
union, i.e. from 1999 to 2023.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 572.1 Profit for the financial year before tax
Aggregate profit for the financial year before tax  rose by almost 80% in 2023 on 
the year.  At €48.7 billion, pre-tax profit for 2023 was not only two-and-a-half times the 
long-term average, but was also the highest figure seen in the last 25 years.  In 
addition, all of the categories of banks considered  as well as around 88% of all 
individual institutions contained in the data recorded higher profits for the year in 2023 
than they had done in 2022.
In absolute terms, savings banks and credit cooperatives were responsible for more 
than half (58%) of the total increase.  At +122.3% and +104.1%, respectively, growth in 
profits for the year before tax recorded by savings banks and credit cooperatives in 
 18) 
 19) 
 20) 
18 Operating income less administrative spending and net valuation charges plus the balance of other and 
extraordinary items.
19 It should be borne in mind, though, that over the last 25 years, German credit institutions’ aggregate average 
total assets for the year also climbed by more than 70%. Annual growth rates have been in positive territory 
since 2019 in particular, whilst in the period from 1999 to 2018 total assets fluctuated but tended to move 
sideways. As such, the significant improvement in performance at the current end is likely to be partly due to 
the expansion in business volumes over recent years.
20 Big banks, regional banks and other commercial banks, branches of foreign banks, Landesbanken, savings 
banks, credit cooperatives, mortgage banks, building and loan associations as well as banks with special, 
development and other central support tasks.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 582023 was well above the average. Both categories of banks predominantly conduct 
conventional lending and deposit business, meaning that they benefited from the 
rising key interest rates in the Eurosystem. Their net interest income rose steeply. But 
much lower net valuation charges than in 2022 also played a key role in the increased 
profit for the year seen by savings banks and credit cooperatives.
Besides this, regional and other commercial banks, which are also highly active in 
the lending and deposit business, recorded significantly higher profits for the year 
before tax than they had done in 2022.  The growth of 82.6% recorded by these 
institutions was roughly on a par with the aggregate across all German credit 
institutions. In absolute terms, regional and other commercial banks accounted for just 
under one-fifth (around 18%) of the total increase in pre-tax profit for the year. Similarly 
to the case of savings banks and credit cooperatives, a strong rise in net interest 
income and lower net valuation charges were instrumental in driving the improvement 
in profit for the year at regional and other commercial banks.
Meanwhile, at +38.4%, growth in profits for the year at big banks fell short of the 
average.  Big banks’ absolute contribution to the increase in aggregate profit for the 
year was comparatively slim as well, amounting to around 11%. Unlike savings banks, 
credit cooperatives and regional and other commercial banks, big banks did not benefit 
from higher net interest income in 2023, with that metric remaining virtually the same 
as it had been in 2022. Instead, the trading result and other operating result proved to 
be the main forces driving the improvement in big banks’ profit for the financial year. In 
contrast to developments at the aggregate level, big banks saw their profit for the 
financial year compressed by higher net valuation charges and steeply increased net 
charges in the other and extraordinary account.
ItemAll 
categories 
of banksBig 
banksRegional 
banks and 
other 
commercial 
banksLandes-
bankenSavings 
banksCredit 
cooperativesMortgage 
banks
Net interest income 65.1 49.1 58.7 67.0 73.1 73.4
Net commission income 22.9 28.5 22.2 14.3 25.0 22.6
Result from the trading portfolio 7.0 17.6 10.5 10.1 0.0 0.0
Other operating result 5.0 4.8 8.5 8.7 1.8 3.9
Operating income 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
General administrative spending − 59.2 − 69.0 − 53.0 − 58.4 − 56.1 − 60.3Table 3.2: Major income and cost item for individual categories of banks in 2023p 
As a percentage of operation income

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 59ItemAll 
categories 
of banksBig 
banksRegional 
banks and 
other 
commercial 
banksLandes-
bankenSavings 
banksCredit 
cooperativesMortgage 
banks
      Staff costs − 29.6 − 30.0 − 24.0 − 27.2 − 33.4 − 33.6
      Other administrative spending − 29.7 − 39.0 − 29.0 − 31.2 − 22.8 − 26.6
Result from the valuation of 
assets− 6.3 − 6.6 − 5.2 − 8.1 − 7.7 − 4.4
Other and extraordinary result − 4.8 − 1.5 − 16.7 − 3.6 − 0.7 − 2.0
2.1.1 Operating income and its components
In 2023, operating income  increased once again significantly more strongly than 
in the previous year, growing by €23.2 billion (+16.5%).  As in 2022, the increase 
was broad-based, with all categories of banks under consideration  and around 85% 
of all individual institutions contained in the data reporting higher operating income in 
2023 than in the preceding year. 21) 
 22) 
 23) 
21 Sum of net interest income, net commission income, result from the trading portfolio and other operating 
result.
22 In 2022 operating income had increased by €14.9 billion (+11.8%).
23 Big banks, regional banks and other commercial banks, branches of foreign banks, Landesbanken, savings 
banks, credit cooperatives, mortgage banks, building and loan associations as well as banks with special, 
development and other central support tasks.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 60Overall, roughly two-thirds of the total increase in operating income in the 
reporting year was attributable to the sharp rise in net interest income.  However, its 
share in operating income remained virtually the same as in 2022. In 2023, net interest 
income remained the most important source of revenue for German credit institutions. 
In addition, the trading result and other operating result also improved considerably, 
with their combined contribution to the overall increase in operating income being 
about half that of net interest income. Nevertheless, the trading result and other 
operating result remained of minor importance overall as a source of income for 
German banks. By contrast, net commission income in 2023 did not contribute to the 
increase in operating income at the aggregate level. However, in absolute terms, net 
commission income remained the second most important source of revenue for 
German credit institutions.
2.1.1.1 Net interest income
In 2023, German credit institutions’ net interest income once again recorded 
considerably stronger growth than in the previous year  and was ultimately the 
main driver of growth in profit for the financial year before tax. Rising by €15.3 
 24) 
24 In 2022, net interest income had increased by €9.4 billion (+11.4%) to €91.6 billion.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 61billion (+16.7%), net interest income amounted to €106.9 billion in the reporting year, 
which is the highest value in 25 years. Much the same as in the previous year, the 
increase in the reporting year was also almost entirely attributable to net interest 
income in the narrower sense, i.e. the contribution to earnings made by interest-
related business. Current income from shares and other variable-yield securities, as 
well as from participating interests, which are likewise included in net interest income, 
also increased on balance. However, in 2023 this once again made only a small 
contribution to growth.
Overall, German credit institutions benefited considerably from the Euroystem’s key 
interest rate hikes.  While both interest income and interest expenditure increased 
substantially, in absolute terms interest income (+€164.4 billion) increased much more 
strongly than interest expenditure (+€149.1 billion) in 2023. The supplementary 
information on the composition of interest income and interest expenditure of German 
credit institutions in 2023 provides an overview of the importance of individual financial 
instruments in German banks’ interest income and interest expenditure.
 25) 
25 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2024b), p. 36, Deutsche Bundesbank (2023d), p. 37 and Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2023b), p. 34.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 62Supplementary information
Supplementary information on the composition of 
interest income and interest expenditure of German 
credit institutions in 2023
The different types of financial instrument held by German credit institutions vary 
in terms of importance regarding their interest income and interest expenditure. 
The following evaluations and chart are based on prudential reporting data; although 
these data are regularly collected only from around 330 of the just under 1,340 
institutions, they nevertheless provide high coverage of the German banking system. 
The banks in the data survey represent 93% of interest income, 97% of interest 
expenditure and 90% of aggregate total assets. For reasons of proportionality, just 
under 1,000 small institutions are not required to provide data. The collected data 
capture around two-thirds of the interest income and interest expenditure of all 
savings banks and around half of the interest income and interest expenditure of credit 
cooperatives.  In addition, the data also include the consolidated interest income and 
interest expenditure of the German parent companies’ foreign subsidiaries. The 
business of these subsidiaries is conducted more frequently in foreign currency and 
less frequently with households.
The left-hand side of Chart 3.4 shows the income shares of individual financial 
instruments in total interest income. 1) 
1 Equivalent data are available for 240 larger institutions of the total of around 1,050 savings banks and credit 
cooperatives.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 63At 26%, loans to non-financial enterprises made the strongest contribution to 
German institutions’ interest income in 2023.  Loans to enterprises often have variable 
interest rates, with the result that interest rate hikes translate to income gains 
comparatively rapidly. Moreover, German banks were quick to pass on the Eurosystem’
s key interest rate hikes when granting new loans to non-financial corporations.
By contrast, at 7% and 8% respectively, debt securities and loans to households for 
house purchase made only minor contributions to interest income in the reporting 
year.  Both financing instruments exhibit relatively long interest rate fixation periods 
and residual maturities; their income therefore grew in absolute terms, albeit at a 
slower rate than other financing instruments. As a result, the shares of debt securities 
and loans for house purchase in total interest income were down on their 2022 levels. 
In the case of loans for house purchase, in particular, German credit institutions passed 
on the Eurosystem’s key interest rate hikes relatively quickly and unexpectedly sharply.
 However, these higher interest rates initially only affected new business, which was 
significantly more subdued in 2023 than it had been in previous years. By contrast, 
interest rates on the total stock of loans for house purchase rose only slowly on 
 2) 
 3) 
 4) 2 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2024d) 
3 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023e), p. 39.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 64account of the longer fixation periods.  In addition, the inclusion of German parent 
companies’ foreign subsidiaries in this dataset means that the significance of loans for 
house purchase is probably relatively low.
In the reporting year, a significant contribution of 23% to total interest income was 
attributable to other lending . This includes, for example, consumer credit but also 
loans to government, other credit institutions and other financial corporations. The 
maturities and interest rate fixation periods on other lending types are often less long-
term than those on loans for house purchase. Correspondingly, the Eurosystem’s key 
interest rate hikes are likely to have been reflected more rapidly in interest income for 
other lending, too.
In 2023, more than one-third of interest income was generated outside of the loans 
and debt securities business . Derivatives accounted for 20% of interest income. A 
further 17% stemmed from cash funds and other items. The bulk of cash funds and 
other items was attributable to deposits with the central bank, with average interest 
rates rising from 0.15% in 2022 to 3.27% in 2023 in the wake of monetary policy 
tightening. Consequently, German credit institutions in 2023 generated around 12% of 
total interest income from deposits held with the central bank.  Derivatives and cash 
funds have short interest rate fixation periods, which means that interest rate hikes 
lead to rising income particularly quickly. This led to their share in total interest income 
rising by 12 percentage points on 2022.
The significance of the individual financing instruments in terms of interest income 
was different for each category of bank in most cases . Interest income from loans to 
non-financial corporations was of similarly high importance for virtually all categories 
of banks in 2023. However, it made the largest contribution to total interest income in 
the case of credit cooperatives, where it accounted for around one-third of total 
interest income. Loans for house purchase played a major role for savings banks and 
credit cooperatives, in particular, as they each generated around one-quarter of their 
overall interest income from these loans. Conversely, interest income from debt 
securities was most relevant for big banks, amounting to roughly one-eighth of interest 
income. Other lending made the strongest contribution to aggregate interest income in 
the case of regional and other commercial banks, where it generated one-third of 
interest income. Similarly, big banks saw other lending contribute around one-quarter 
as well. In the reporting year, derivatives were most significant in the Landesbank 
category. Less than half but markedly more than one-third of Landesbanken’s total  4) 
 5) 
4 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023e), p. 58.
5 German credit institutions generated roughly €41 billion overall in interest income from deposits held with the 
central bank in 2023. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2024a), p. 84.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 65interest income stemmed from derivatives. This large share is partly due to the fact 
that Landesbanken are often the counterparties of savings banks’ interest rate 
derivatives. Compared with credit cooperatives, savings banks make use of interest rate 
derivatives more frequently. Cash funds and residual items made up a particularly high 
share of commercial banks’ interest income,  contributing one-fifth of their total.
The right-hand side of Chart 3.4 shows the expenditure shares of individual financial 
instruments in total interest expenditure.
At 46%, deposits made the largest contribution to German institutions' interest 
expenditure in 2023.  Compared with 2022, the share of interest expenditure on 
deposits in total expenditure increased significantly by around 12 percentage points. 
The main reason for this was that deposits represented a large part of German banks’ 
funding but only rarely carried positive interest rates in 2022. The key interest rate 
hikes could potentially have been transmitted rapidly to deposits given their regular 
short contractual maturities and fixation periods. However, the increase in interest 
rates on sight deposits from the non-financial private sector was distinctly less 
pronounced in 2023 than would have been expected based on historical patterns.  
Initially, this slowed the increase in interest expenditure on deposits. However, 
depositors started shifting low-interest sight deposits into higher-interest-bearing fixed-
term deposits at the end of 2022 – a move that is likely to have contributed markedly to 
the increase in interest expenditure on deposits.
In the reporting year, German banks’ liabilities in the form of loans and debt 
securities accounted only for around 19% of their interest expenditure.  Compared 
with the previous year, the share decreased significantly by 11 percentage points, as 
these liabilities are usually associated with longer maturities and interest rate fixation 
periods than deposits and because average interest rates on existing business 
increased relatively slowly. However, interest rate hikes did lead to considerably higher 
rates on new business than on deposits.
Derivatives and residual items accounted for slightly more than one-third of 
interest expenditure . Derivatives produced 28% of interest expenditure, while residual 
items contributed an additional 7%. The residual items also include interest 
expenditure from central bank business. This interest expenditure rose significantly as 
compared to 2022 on the back of the Eurosystem’s key interest rate hikes. In the 
reporting year, around 2% of German credit institutions’ total interest expenditure was  6) 
 7) 
 8) 
 9) 6 Aggregate of big banks as well as regional and other commercial banks.
7 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023e), pp. 56 f.
8 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a), p. 42.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 66attributable to monetary policy refinancing operations with the central bank.  Overall, 
however, the significance of residual items decreased by 2 percentage points in 2023.
The impact individual financing instruments had on interest expenditure also varied 
from one category of bank to another.  In 2023, deposits accounted for well over half 
of total interest expenditure at commercial banks, savings banks and credit 
cooperatives. By contrast, they accounted for only one-third of total interest 
expenditure in the case of Landesbanken. Interest expenditure stemming from credit 
obligations was of notable importance only for regional and other commercial banks, 
where it accounted for roughly one-sixth of total interest expenditure. Derivative-
induced interest expenditure played an important role for those categories of banks, in 
particular, whose interest income is likewise heavily influenced by derivatives. For 
example, derivatives accounted for roughly half of total interest expenditure for 
Landesbanken, in particular. In terms of proportion, residual items were most 
significant for the interest expenditure of savings banks and big banks, accounting only 
for just over one-tenth of total interest expenditure in each case, however. 9) 
9 In absolute terms, German banks incurred around €5 billion in interest expenditure from monetary policy 
refinancing operations with the central bank in 2023. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2024a), p. 84.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 67As in the preceding year, developments in net interest income in the reporting year 
were mainly attributable to differences in the speed and degree of interest rate 
increases applying to loans and deposits.  For example, monthly interest rate 
statistics show that whilst interest rates on new loans to non-financial corporations and 
households continued to increase sharply, interest rates on overnight deposits from 
the private non-financial sector in particular were raised by banks to a relatively weak 
extent once again. According to an estimate in the Bundesbank’s 2023 Financial 
Stability Review, overall interest expenditure in 2023 would have been an estimated €29 
billion higher if German banks had passed through the key interest rate hikes to 
overnight deposits as observed in the past.  However, the volume of these deposits 
had grown to an unprecedented level by 2022, meaning that, in 2023, this type of 
deposit continued to be not only the most cost-efficient type of funding, but also the 
main source of funding for German banks. The nevertheless relatively strong growth in 
interest expenditure was probably due in part to the fact that interest rates on time 
deposits rose as anticipated and thus to a greater extent than interest rates on sight 
deposits.  Moreover, non-financial corporations and households increasingly shifted 
their funds from sight deposits to time deposits.
Furthermore, German credit institutions generated a total of roughly €41 billion in 
interest income from deposits held at the central bank in 2023.  This amounted to 
around 12% of total interest income in the reporting year, with interest income from 
deposits held at the central bank contributing just under one-quarter of the growth in 
interest income.  By contrast, at roughly €5 billion, interest expenditure on monetary 
policy refinancing operations accounted for only around 2% of German credit 
institutions’ overall interest expenditure in 2023 and contributed just under 5% of the 
rise in interest expenditure. 26) 
 27) 
 28) 
 29) 
 30) 
 31) 
26 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023e), pp. 59f.
27 See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a), p. 15 and pp. 41 f.
28 See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a), pp. 41 f.
29 In 2022, German banks’ interest income from deposits held at the central bank amounted to only around 
€2 billion. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2024a), p. 84.
30 This income was many times greater than the negative interest paid to the Eurosystem during the negative 
interest rate policy period.
31 Owing to the negative remuneration of TLTRO III, German banks still generated interest income from 
monetary policy refinancing operations to the tune of roughly €2 billion in 2022. See Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2024a), p. 84.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 68All of the categories of banks under consideration  posted higher net interest 
income for the year under review than in 2022.  However, the increases varied very 
considerably across the different categories of banks. In particular, savings banks’ net 
interest income saw strong above-average growth of €6.3 billion (+27.2%), meaning 
that roughly 41% of the total increase in net interest income in 2023 was attributable to 
savings banks. By contrast, the increase recorded by credit cooperatives was slightly 
below average at €2.5 billion (+14.1%). The main reason for this was that the increase in 
interest expenditure in relation to interest income was significantly greater at credit 
 32) 
32 Big banks, regional banks and other commercial banks, branches of foreign banks, Landesbanken, savings 
banks, credit cooperatives, mortgage banks, building and loan associations as well as banks with special, 
development and other central support tasks.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 69cooperatives than at savings banks. Like savings banks, regional and other commercial 
banks also recorded substantial growth in their net interest income in 2023, up €3.8 
billion (+23.5%). Together, savings banks, regional and other commercial banks, and 
credit cooperatives generated just over 80% of the total increase in net interest income 
in 2023. By contrast, big banks’ net interest income increased only marginally, 
stagnating at the level recorded in 2022.  Unlike the situation at regional and other 
commercial banks, interest income and interest expenditure at big banks increased in 
almost equal measure.
As savings banks and credit cooperatives predominantly conduct conventional lending 
and deposit business, net interest income plays a relatively important role as a source 
of income for both categories of banks. For example, in 2023 nearly three-quarters of 
operating income at savings banks and credit cooperatives was attributable to net 
interest income. By contrast, regional and other commercial banks generated only 
around half of their operating income through net interest income, with the equivalent 
figure for big banks being just short of 60%.
The interest margin  increased again in the reporting year for the first time since 
2018.  It was up 0.14 percentage point compared with 2022, but, standing at 1.00%, still 
fell short of the long-term average (1.09%). The improvement resulted entirely from the 
increase in net interest income, as aggregate average total assets for the year hardly 
grew at all in 2023.
In a comparison of the various categories of banks, savings banks and credit 
cooperatives in particular recorded an above-average improvement in their interest 
margin. The interest margin of savings banks increased by 0.42 percentage point 
compared with 2022, while that of credit cooperatives rose by 0.22 percentage point. In 
2023, savings banks and credit cooperatives were once again the categories of banks 
with the highest interest margins, at 1.89% and 1.75%, respectively. Nevertheless, both 
categories of banks were still short of their long-term average levels (2.04% and 2.13%, 
respectively). In addition to savings banks and credit cooperatives, regional and other 
commercial banks also improved their interest margin. This increase, which amounted 
to 0.16 percentage point, was roughly on a par with the aggregate across all German 
banks. However, at 1.00%, the interest margin of regional and other commercial banks  33) 
 34) 
33 However, developments at individual institutions were not uniform. Whilst individual institutions in the 
category of big banks reported higher net interest income in the reporting year than in the previous year, 
others reported declines or figures on a par with the 2022 level. Overall, positive and negative changes in net 
interest income within this category of banks largely balanced each other out.
34 Net interest income in relation to average total assets for the year.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 70likewise fell short of the long-term average level for the category (1.63%). The interest 
margin of big banks, by contrast, remained at the previous year’s level, standing at 
0.66%, and was still significantly below the long-term average (0.85%).
2.1.1.2 Net commision income
Net commission income stagnated at the previous year’s level and once again 
played no part in improving the profit for the financial year in 2023. Unlike in the 
previous year, both commissions received and commissions paid declined.  In absolute 
terms, however, the declines in 2023 of €1.9 billion and €1.6 billion, respectively, were 
nearly the same size, meaning that net commission income, totalling €37.6 billion, 
remained at the previous year’s level. Furthermore, as aggregate total assets of 
German banks remained largely unchanged on the year, the commission margin  in 
2023 also stagnated at the previous year’s  level. In addition, at 0.35%, it was also in line  
with the long-term average.
Overall, the Eurosystem’s key interest rate hikes were a drag on German banks’ net 
non-interest income.  However, commissions business in the individual business 
areas was mixed across the various categories of banks. German credit institutions 
derived most benefit from payments business and portfolio management. By contrast, 
declines were seen above all in lending business, securities business and brokerage 
business. 35) 
 36) 
35 Net commission income in relation to average aggregate total assets for the year.
36 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2024b), p. 36, Deutsche Bundesbank (2023d), p. 37 and Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2023b), p. 34.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 71In a comparison of the categories of banks under consideration, the absolute 
changes in net commission income were low across the board, but there were 
sizeable differences when looking at percentage changes.  The changes in the 
commission margins recorded by the respective categories of banks were also 
correspondingly low. For example, net commission income of regional and other 
commercial banks declined by €0.9 billion (-10.8%) compared with 2022. The 
commission margin of this category of banks thus fell by 0.06 percentage point to 
0.38%. By contrast, savings banks and big banks increased their net commission 
income in 2023 by €0.4 billion (+3.8%) and €0.3 billion (+2.9%), respectively. As a result 
of this, the commission margin of savings banks rose marginally to 0.65%. The 
commission margin of big banks remained unchanged at 0.38%, despite slightly higher 
net commission income in 2023. Credit cooperatives’ net commission income and thus 
also their commission margin remained unchanged in the year under review compared 
with the previous year.
2.1.1.3 Net result from the trading portfolio
The net result from the trading portfolio increased by €1.8 billion (+18.4%) to €11.6 
billion in 2023.  The trading result continued to be a significant source of income only 
for big banks, regional and other commercial banks, and Landesbanken. In the 
reporting year, big banks (+59.1%) and regional and other commercial banks (+28.7%), 


The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 72in particular, improved their trading results. This was primarily driven by gains from 
hedging transactions attributable to increased customer demand in the changed 
interest rate environment. By contrast, Landesbanken recorded a decline of 38.6% 
compared with 2022. In their case, the higher interest rate level primarily led to 
valuation losses on derivatives.
2.1.1.4 Other operating result
The other operating result  recorded a very strong improvement compared with 
2022 (+€6.4 billion/+359.7%).  This increase was almost exclusively driven by big banks. 
Their other operating result for 2023 was €5.6 billion higher than in the previous year. 
In comparison with 2022, big banks saw a significant decline in their other operating 
expenses, in particular. The Eurosystem’s key interest rate hikes and the resulting 
higher interest rate level led, above all, to a reduction in transfers to provisions for 
pensions.
 37) 
37 Summary item used to record income and charges from operating business that have no connection to net 
interest income, net commission income or the trading result. It includes leasing expenses and income, the 
gross result for transactions in goods and subsidiary transactions, depreciation of assets leased, other 
operating charges and income, and other taxes as well as withdrawals from and transfers to the fund required 
by the building and loan association rules (only for building and loan associations).

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 732.1.2 Net valuation charges
German credit institutions’ net valuation charges  declined by just over one-third 
compared with the previous year. After the sharp increase in 2022, net valuation 
charges declined in the reporting year by €6.0 billion to €10.3 billion, thus falling under 
the long-term average of €13.5 billion. This decline was chiefly attributable to the lower 
depreciation of and value adjustments to loans and advances, and provisions for 
contingent liabilities and for commitments. At €11.9 billion in the reporting year, they 
were €6.5 billion lower than the previous year’s figure and thus also below the long-
term average of €17.2 billion. Compared with the previous year, a considerable decline 
, could be seen in particular for write-downs on securities in the liquidity reserve
following a sharp increase in 2022 against the backdrop of the higher interest rate 
level. In addition, there were reversals of impairment losses on securities which had 
been written down in 2022 (for more information see the supplementary information 
 38) 
38 Net valuation charges comprise the effects of value adjustments, write-ups and write-downs on accounts 
receivable and securities in the liquidity reserve. In addition, income and charges in connection with transfers 
from and to loan-loss provisions are taken into account, as are transfers and releases relating to undisclosed 
reserves pursuant to Section 340f of the German Commercial Code. However, due to the cross-offsetting 
option permissible under the Commercial Code, the annual accounts do not show the extent to which 
undisclosed reserves have been formed or released.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 74on earnings effects since the interest rate reversal on securities held in German credit 
institutions’ banking books). Nevertheless, a comparison of the categories of banks 
under consideration shows considerable differences.
 


The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 75Supplementary information
Earnings effects since the interest rate reversal on 
securities held in German credit institutions’ banking 
books
The interest rate reversal initiated in 2022 led to price losses, especially for interest-
bearing securities held in German credit institutions’ banking books.  In terms of 
content and methodology, the following analysis is based on the box analysing 
earnings effects of the interest rate reversal on securities held in German credit 
institutions’ banking books in 2022, which was included in the September 2023 Monthly 
Report as part of the article on the performance of German credit institutions in 2022.  
This time, the focus is on developments in 2023. The analysis only covers the subset of 
German banks preparing their financial statements in accordance with the German 
Commercial Code ( Handelsgesetzbuch ) for which an allocation of securities to fixed and 
current assets is possible at the individual institution level. This constituted around 
1,143 of the total of 1,340 German banks in 2023. The subset is mainly composed of 
savings banks and credit cooperatives and, with average total assets amounting to 
’ roughly €5,061 billion in 2023, represents just under half of German banks  aggregate 
annual average total assets for the year.
After significant losses in the 2022 calendar year, the German bond and equity 
markets saw price gains again in 2023.  These amounted to 1.3% on the bond market 
as measured by the German bond index (REX) and 16.5% on the equity market as 
measured by the German stock index (DAX). Chart 3.10 shows the effect of these 
movements on the valuation of securities held in German credit institutions’ banking 
books. It depicts the stock of hidden losses and hidden reserves and the net valuation 
result from securities held in the liquidity reserve within a calendar year. The stock and 
the net valuation result are specified as a percentage of annual average total assets  1) 
 2) 
1 The banking book comprises all on-balance and off-balance sheet items in financial instruments and 
commodities outside the trading book in accordance with the European Regulation on prudential 
requirements for credit institutions and investment firms ((EU) No 575/2013). Trading book positions are held 
with trading intent or serve as a hedge for positions held with trading intent. Securities include tradable 
financial instruments such as debt securities and shares.
2 See the box entitled “Earnings effects of the interest rate reversal on securities held in German credit 
institutions’ banking books”, Deutsche Bundesbank (2023f), pp. 105 f.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 76(left-hand panel), while the right-hand panel shows the market interest rate as a 
percentage. Funds which hold these financial instruments as underlying assets are also 
included under either “debt securities” or “equities”.
In the year under review, German credit institutions’ banking book securities were 
still assigned in roughly equal part to current assets (securities in the liquidity 
reserve) and to fixed assets.  Up to 2021, there was a consistent pattern of around one 
in three securities being allocated to fixed assets. This share increased significantly in 
2022 – mainly due to reclassification of some securities that had not yet reached 
maturity from current assets to fixed assets – to just over 50% of securities in the 
banking book.  This share remained virtually the same in 2023.
The net valuation result for securities in the liquidity reserve improved significantly 
over the course of 2023, although German credit institutions’ hidden losses peaked 
in the third quarter of 2023.  The increase in market interest rates as a result of the 
Eurosystem’s key interest rate hikes initially led to a further slight accumulation of 
hidden losses in debt securities in the first three quarters of 2023. However, a fall in 
market interest rates subsequently led to a decline in hidden losses created by the 
interest rate reversal in the fourth quarter of 2023 and ultimately to an increase in 
 3) 
3 See the box entitled “Earnings effects of the interest rate reversal on securities held in German credit 
institutions’ banking books”, Deutsche Bundesbank (2023f), pp. 105 f.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 77hidden reserves. The net valuation result for securities in the liquidity reserve improved 
over the course of 2023 overall and was particularly positive in the fourth quarter of 
2023.
Only one-seventh of positive price changes were booked in the profit and loss 
statement in 2023.  From the total price gains amounting to 0.49% of annual average 
total assets, only 0.07 percentage point were recognised in the income statement of 
German banks as reversals of write-downs on securities classified as current assets. 
The effect of positive price changes, however, was largely reflected in the decline in 
hidden losses (around two-thirds or 0.3 percentage point) and in the rise in hidden 
reserves (around one-quarter or 0.12 percentage point).
In addition to the decline in the market interest rate, the pull-to-par effect is likely 
to have positively impacted the performance.  The market value of a fixed-interest 
security gradually converges to its redemption value (par value) as the maturity date 
approaches. In 2023, corresponding price gains for debt securities that had posted 
losses in 2022 led to a decline in hidden losses, a build-up of hidden reserves or a 
visibly positive contribution to the net valuation result.  According to an estimate in 
the Bundesbank’s 2023 Financial Stability Review, 68% of the valuation losses for debt 
securities in 2022 are likely to be offset by 2027 due to the pull-to-par effect. 4) 
 5) 
4 The point in time at which price gains can be recognised in profit or loss is dependent on the chosen valuation 
approach. The less strict lower of cost or market principle is applied for fixed assets, which means a 
contribution to earnings is not possible until the asset is sold or the principal repaid. The liquidity reserve is 
subject to the strict lower of cost or market principle, which requires a reversal of write-down to be recognised 
directly in profit or loss, as long as the amortised costs are not exceeded.
5 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a), p. 38.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 78In contrast to overall developments, net valuation charges at big banks were more 
than three times the previous year’s figure (+248.2%).  At big banks, there was an 
increase in the depreciation of and value adjustments to loans and advances, and 
provisions for contingent liabilities and for commitments of 54.3% on the year. This 
increase was driven predominantly by large write-downs at one institution belonging to 
the big banks category.
A sharp decline in net valuation charges was recorded above all by savings banks 
and credit cooperatives (savings banks: −35.3%, credit cooperatives: −70.2%).  Both 
savings banks and credit cooperatives reduced depreciation of and value adjustments 
to loans and advances, and provisions for contingent liabilities and for commitments 
(savings banks: −30.5%, credit cooperatives: −58.6%). At the same time, income from 
value readjustments to loans and advances, and provisions for contingent liabilities and 
for commitments increased on the year (savings banks: +28.5%, credit cooperatives: 
+150.7%). Savings banks and credit cooperatives primarily realised reversals of 
impairment losses on securities which had been written down in 2022.
Net valuation charges also more than halved at regional and other commercial 
banks (-53.8%).  They reported depreciation of and value adjustments to loans and 
advances, and provisions for contingent liabilities and for commitments that amounted 
to less than half of the previous year’s figure (-52.9%). 
Taken together, regional and other commercial banks, savings banks and credit 
cooperatives were responsible for virtually the entire decline in net valuation 
charges on aggregate for all German credit institutions.  In total, just under 67% of 
the institutions under review reported lower net valuation charges. Going forward, 
however, net valuation charges could rise again in the coming years owing to current 
developments in lending business. For example, a significant increase in net transfers 
to the fund for general banking risks was already observed in the year under review 
(+11.3 billion or +391%). This indicates that institutions used the good earnings 
situation in 2023 to prepare themselves for rising net valuation charges (for more 
information on this, see the supplementary information on the development of non-
performing loans in the German banking sector). 39) 
39 Around 64% of savings banks and roughly 75% of credit cooperatives reported a drop in net valuation 
charges compared with the previous year.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 79 


The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 80Supplementary information
The development of non-performing loans in the 
German banking sector
The sharp increase in the interest rate level following the end of the period of low 
interest rates, structural adjustments in the commercial real estate market, and 
economic developments, which have been subdued at times, are now being 
reflected in the development of German institutions’ non-performing loans (NPL).  
The NPL ratio – i.e. the ratio of loans that are, for the most part, more than 90 days past 
due or for which it is considered unlikely that the debt vis-à-vis the institution will be 
repaid in full, to total loans  – has risen from a low level since the end of 2022 and 
stood at 1.6% in the first quarter of 2024. 1) 
 2) 
1 Stock of loans to non-financial corporations, households, general government, central banks, credit 
institutions and other financial institutions. The definition of non-performing exposures (NPEs) is based on 
Article 47a(3) of the Capital Requirements Regulation (CRR).
2 If not stated separately, this supplementary information considers all data in Germany from institutions – 
excluding branches of foreign banks – that report under the harmonised financial reporting (FINREP) 
framework in Europe. Where available, consolidated group reports from all institutions are used to form the 
aggregate. The aggregation methodology only draws on individual reports in the case of institutions that are 
not part of a reporting group or that do not submit a group report themselves. Institutions that are part of a 
reporting group are therefore excluded from the aggregate.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 81Loans to households have thus far played a minor role in this development.  
Although they account for around 36% of the loans issued by German credit 
institutions,  a large proportion of loans to households are loans for house purchase. 
The long interest rate fixation periods customary in residential real estate lending in 
Germany initially protect borrowers from an increase in debt service during a phase of 
rising interest rates.  However, looking ahead, higher credit risk could also materialise 
in this segment and ultimately impact the performance of German credit institutions if 
debt servicing costs rise as a result of higher interest rates and are more difficult to 
shoulder. Furthermore, if credit risk were to materialise on a broad basis, the impact 
would be considerable given the share of loans for house purchase in German credit 
institutions’ total loans.  Nevertheless, in view of the lead time that such a 
development could potentially entail, banks have the opportunity to build up sufficient 
reserves over time and thus cushion potential losses. This would also stagger the 
impact on the performance of German credit institutions. Given that the labour market 
 3) 
 4) 
 5) 
 6) 3 Prudential reporting (FINREP) data; average of the quarterly data for 2023.
4 Furthermore, during the low interest rate period, households and lenders agreed interest rate fixation periods 
that were considerably longer still. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a), pp. 51 f.
5 For instance, according to prudential reporting (FINREP) data, for 2023, loans to households secured by 
residential real estate accounted for around 28% of the total loans issued by the German institutions under 
review.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 82has also proved relatively robust thus far,  the NPL ratio for loans secured by 
residential real estate  remained at a low level in the first quarter of 2024, standing at 
0.8%. 
A significantly smaller share of only around 11% of loans to households is attributable 
to consumer credit.  Accordingly, NPL developments in this line of business have less 
of an impact on the performance of German credit institutions. Although consumer 
credit tends to be associated with higher risks as these loans are primarily granted to 
borrowers with lower incomes and small financial reserves, only a slight increase in the 
NPL ratio has been observed so far over the past few quarters.  This is also because 
the labour market has proved robust to date.
While the NPL ratio for the portfolio of loans to households has been relatively 
constant thus far, the NPL ratio for loans to non-financial corporations has grown 
slightly over recent quarters to 3.1%.  This increase is being driven by loans secured by 
commercial real estate in particular, which make up around one-third of loans to non-
financial corporations. The NPL ratio for loans secured by commercial real estate to 
non-financial corporations increased by 1.9 percentage point within four quarters to 
stand most recently at 4.0 % in the first quarter of 2024.
The fact that developments in commercial real estate loans differ from those in the 
residential real estate segment is attributable to various factors. First, the interest rate 
fixation periods for commercial real estate loans are significantly shorter than in the 
residential real estate segment. Second, real estate enterprises’ debt-servicing capacity 
has fallen markedly due to recognised valuation losses.  Added to this are structural 
changes in the market as a result of the reduction in the need for office and other 
commercial spaces. Follow-up financing and project development loans, in particular, 
currently present risks for banks. Follow-up financing in the current interest rate 
environment tends to entail considerably higher interest rates, which could overwhelm 
borrowers’ debt-servicing capacity. 60% of the stock of commercial real estate loans still 
have interest rates of below 3%. 6) 
 7) 
 8) 
 9) 
 10) 
6 The labour market remained stable over the past two years despite the cyclical weakness, with both 
employment and unemployment rising slightly of late. Actual earnings recorded strong growth of around 6% 
in both 2023 and 2024. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2024e).
7 Ratio of non-performing loans to households secured by residential real estate to total loans to households 
secured by residential real estate.
8 Prudential reporting (FINREP) data; average of the quarterly data for 2023.
9 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a), pp. 52 f. The NPL ratio for consumer credit (ratio of non-performing 
consumer loans to total consumer loans) stood at 3.8% in the first quarter of 2024, having therefore risen by 
only around 0.3 percentage point over the last eight quarters up to that time.
10 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a), p. 62.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 83The rise in the NPL ratio for commercial real estate loans observed since the 
beginning of 2023 is largely attributable to significant institutions,  not least due 
to their credit exposures in the United States.  However, the NPL ratio for 
commercial real estate loans also rose for less significant institutions recently. Loans to 
non-financial corporations secured by commercial real estate account for roughly 12% 
of total loans.  The impact on the performance of German credit institutions could 
therefore be noticeable, depending on the extent to which credit risk ultimately 
materialises – also given the sharp drop in collateral values caused by the downturn in 
the real estate market.
An important contribution to enhancing the resilience of the financial system is 
made by the prudential backstop for non-performing exposures that was 
introduced around five years ago in Europe.  This provides for a gradual increase in 
the minimum loss coverage for non-performing exposures originated from 26 April 
2019 onwards depending on their credit protection. Institutions can fulfil the required 
 11) 
 12) 
 13) 
 14) 
11 Credit institutions directly supervised by the ECB. This section and the following analysis also take into 
account subsidiaries of foreign significant institutions operating in Germany.
12 US commercial real estate loans only account for a one-digit percentage share of all loans secured by 
commercial real estate to non-financial corporations in German banks’ portfolios overall and are concentrated 
on individual larger institutions. 
13 Prudential reporting (FINREP) data; average of the quarterly data for 2023.
14 See Regulation (EU) 2019/630 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 April 2019 amending 
Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 as regards minimum loss coverage for non-performing exposures.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 84minimum loss coverage via specific credit risk adjustments, additional value 
adjustments, other reductions in own funds or by meeting further specific conditions. 
Alternatively, the applicable amount of insufficient coverage is to be deducted from an 
institution’s Common Equity Tier 1 items.
Given the backstop’s design, an increase in the average deduction item (in relation to 
risk-weighted assets) was observed, as anticipated, from the backstop’s effective entry 
into force. However, the capital deduction only accounted for around 0.05% of German 
institutions’ risk-weighted assets in the first quarter of 2024.  Should the deduction 
item increase further, this is likely to reduce capital resources in the coming years. If, 
instead, an institution raises its impairment losses recorded in net valuation charges to 
fulfil the minimum loss coverage and to avoid the capital deduction, the backstop could 
also have a greater direct impact on the institution’s performance in future. 
Although net valuation charges sank overall in the 2023 reporting year, it is 
expected that  net valuation charges will continue to negatively affect profitability in 
The decline on 2024, too, given the developments and uncertainties outlined above. 
 15) 
 16) 
15 Alongside the type of credit protection, the minimum loss coverage level is based on how long the exposure 
has been classified as non-performing. The longer an exposure is non-performing, the higher the required 
minimum loss coverage is. This approach is not applied to exposures originated before 26 April 2019.
16 Taking into account all data in Germany from institutions (including guarantee banks, for instance) – 
excluding branches of foreign banks – that report under the common reporting (COREP) framework in Europe 
at the highest respective level of consolidation.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 85the year recorded by savings banks and credit cooperatives, which had a major impact 
on overall developments, should be viewed in the context of the strong rise in net 
valuation charges observed in 2022 due to high losses stemming from the increased 
interest rate level and the resulting write-downs on securities in the liquidity reserve. 
Furthermore, a significant increase in net transfers to the fund for general banking 
risks was already observed in the year under review (+11.3 billion or +391%). Net 
transfers amounted to €14.1 billion and were therefore considerably above the long-
term average of just under €6 billion. This indicates that institutions used the good 
earnings situation in 2023 to prepare themselves for rising net valuation charges.
 

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 862.1.3 Administrative spending
General administrative spending  rose by 2.4% in the reporting year and 
therefore less strongly than in the preceding year.  Growth also remained far 
below the rise in the general price level. Unlike in the previous year, the overall increase 
in 2023 was primarily attributable to other administrative spending, which grew by 
4.6%. By contrast, staff costs remained at their 2022 level. However, this had no notable 
impact on the respective shares of total administrative spending. Staff costs and other 
administrative spending each continued to account for half of total spending.
In the case of staff costs, various countervailing effects came together and virtually 
cancelled each other out on aggregate. The increase in wages and salaries of €1.6 
billion (+4.4%), for instance, was offset overall by an almost equal decrease in social 
security costs and costs relating to pensions of €1.5 billion (-12.3%). On the one hand, 
wages and salaries rose against the backdrop of high inflation, whilst on the other 
hand, some German credit institutions cut staff and made lower pension provisions 
than in previous years due to the changed interest rate environment.
Other administrative spending grew on aggregate due to two main reasons:  first, it 
reflected the general rise in prices caused by inflation. Second, German banks stepped 
up their investment in digitalisation and information security.
Differing developments were observed when comparing categories of banks, 
however.  General administrative spending decreased slightly, by 0.6% at big banks and 
by 0.9% at regional banks and other commercial banks. Viewed in absolute terms, staff 
costs declined more strongly than other administrative spending rose in both 
categories of banks. By contrast, general administrative spending at savings banks and 
credit cooperatives recorded significant growth of 6.9% and 6.0%, respectively. Unlike 
big banks, regional banks and other commercial banks, savings banks and credit 
cooperatives recorded increases in both staff costs and in other administrative 
spending. 40) 
 41) 
40 General administrative spending encompasses staff costs and other administrative spending. Other 
administrative spending includes, for example, investment in product development, information technology, 
and digitalisation. In addition, other administrative spending also comprises depreciation of and value 
adjustments to tangible and intangible assets.
41 General administrative spending rose by 3.3% in 2022.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 872.1.4 Balance in the other and extraordinary account
The balance in the other and extraordinary account  deteriorated significantly in 
2023.  Net charges in the other and extraordinary account rose by €5.5 billion, which 
almost completely offset the decline in net valuation charges. Overall, net charges in 
the other and extraordinary account increased in the reporting year to more than triple 
the figure from 2022 and, at €7.9 billion, stood at the level of the long-term average.
This deterioration was primarily driven by big banks.  In the previous year, a one-off 
effect  at an institution in the category of big banks had significantly reduced net 
charges in the other and extraordinary account. A comparable one-off effect did not  
occur in 2023, causing big banks’ net charges to go up by €4.5 billion. Furthermore, 
regional banks and other commercial banks reported a rise in net charges of €2.3 
 42) 
 43) 
42 The other and extraordinary account includes depreciation of and value adjustments to participating 
interests, shares in affiliated enterprises and securities treated as fixed assets, income from value 
readjustments to participating interests, shares in affiliated enterprises and securities treated as fixed assets, 
charges and income from loss transfers, extraordinary charges and income as well as profits transferred 
under profit pooling, a profit transfer agreement or a partial profit transfer agreement.
43 In 2022, one institution in the category of big banks generated high income from value readjustments to 
participating interests and shares in affiliated enterprises. This significantly boosted the balance in the other 
and extraordinary account for German banks as an aggregate. 

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 88billion in the other and extraordinary account in the year under review. This increase 
resulted primarily from higher extraordinary charges at one institution in the category 
of banks. This institution recorded profits transferred under profit pooling, a profit 
transfer agreement or a partial profit transfer agreement that were €1.7 billion higher 
than in the previous year. By contrast, savings banks reported a considerable 
improvement in their other and extraordinary account balance. Net charges here went 
down by €1.5 billion because depreciation of and value adjustments to participating 
interests, shares in affiliated enterprises and securities treated as fixed assets declined 
on the year.
Item 2021 2022 2023p
Other and extraordinary result - 3,547 - 2,475 - 7,941
Income (total) 5,720 6,155 2,650
      Value readjustments to participating interests, shares in affiliated enterprises, 
and securities treated as fixed assets2,144 5,175 1,570
      from loss transfers 1,210 33 26
      Extraordinary income 2,366 947 1,054
Charges (total) - 9,267 - 8,630 - 10,591
      Depreciation of and value adjustments to participating interests, shares in 
affiliated enterprises, and securities treated as fixed assets- 1,494 - 3,424 - 2,519
      from loss transfers -318 -566 -479 
      Extraordinary charges - 3,585 -983 -753 
      Profits transferred under profit pooling, a profit transfer agreement or a 
partial profit transfer agreement- 3,870 - 3,657 - 6,840
2.2 Profitability and cost efficiency
Measured by the return on assets and the cost/income ratio, the profitability as well as 
cost efficiency of German banks improved considerably. In the reporting year, the 
highest figures seen over the last 25 years were achieved for both metrics.Table 3.3: Breakdown of extraordinary result
€ million

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 892.2.1 Return on assets
Compared with the previous year, the return on assets  of German credit 
institutions virtually doubled to 0.46% in 2023.  A similarly high figure (0.44%) was 
last recorded in 2005. With annual average total assets having only increased slightly, 
this improvement was almost exclusively down to growth in profit for the financial year 
before tax. Furthermore, it was not just the return on assets for German banks as an 
aggregate that rose; the return on assets went up for all of the categories of banks 
under consideration. 44) 
 45) 
 46) 
44 Ratio of profit for the financial year before tax to annual average total assets.
45 The return on assets in 2023 thus also stood well above the long-term average of 0.23%.
46 In 2023, the return on equity (profit for the financial year before tax in relation to the average balance sheet 
equity for the year) followed a similar pattern to the return on assets. Although, at 8.39%, it reached a record 
high for the last ten years, much higher figures were observed over the last 25 years, especially in 1999 
(11.26%) and 2005 (12.87%). Similar to the return on assets, the increase in the return on equity was likewise 
chiefly a result of the rise in the profit for the financial year before tax. However, stronger growth in equity 
compared with total assets dampened the increase in the return on equity slightly. Big banks generated the 
largest return on equity in 2023, at 12.12%. Posting figures of 10.22% and 8.92%, respectively, savings banks 
and credit cooperatives did not come close to the level of the big banks. Compared with the aggregate of all 
German credit institutions, however, savings banks and credit cooperatives also achieved an above-average 
return on equity.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 90

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 91


The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 92Savings banks and credit cooperatives registered the most considerable 
improvement in their return on assets in the year under review.  Compared with the 
previous year, both categories of banks were able to more than double their return on 
assets, with increases of 0.51 and 0.41 percentage point, respectively. As a result, 
savings banks’ return on assets amounted to 0.92% in 2023 and that of credit 
cooperatives came to 0.80% – these were the highest figures amongst all the categories 
of banks under consideration.
Regional banks and other commercial banks were also able to improve their 
profitability substantially in the reporting year.  After rising by 0.19 percentage point 
to 0.43%, their return on assets in 2023 stood at roughly the same level as the 
aggregate of all German banks.
By contrast, big banks’ return on assets grew by only 0.08 percentage point.  The 
return on assets of 0.31% that they therefore achieved for 2023 was also far below the 
average across all German credit institutions.
Category of banks 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023p
All categories of banks 1.07 (- 0.41) 2.71 (1.12) 5.03 (3.22) 4.83 (3.86) 8.39 (6.21)
Table 3.4: Return on equity of individual categories of banks*
%

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 93Category of banks 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023p
Commercial banks - 7.70 (- 8.99) - 1.56 (- 2.95) 2.65 (1.41) 6.05 (5.97) 9.22 (7.07)
      Big banks - 16.63 (- 17.58) - 7.08 (- 8.22) - 2.26 (- 2.13) 9.12 (12.29) 12.12 (11.91)
      Regional banks and 
      other commercial banks4.44 (2.69) 4.10 (2.46) 6.00 (3.81) 4.27 (2.25) 7.58 (4.24)
Landesbanken 2.03 (1.55) 1.29 (0.84) 4.02 (2.26) 4.77 (2.72) 7.45 (5.01)
Savings banks 6.86 (4.83) 5.36 (3.36) 6.27 (4.22) 4.74 (2.82) 10.22 (7.15)
Credit cooperatives 9.17 (6.57) 7.31 (4.98) 8.37 (6.19) 4.59 (3.46) 8.92 (6.47)
Mortgage banks 5.31 (3.75) 8.06 (1.40) 16.91 (5.73) 5.99 (3.76) 8.89 (5.69)
Building and loan associations 3.83 (2.95) 1.66 (0.86) 1.41 (0.50) 2.79 (1.65) 4.14 (1.99)
* Profit or loss for the financial year before tax (in brackets: after tax) as a percentage of annual average 
equity as shown in the balance sheet (including the fund for general banking risks, but excluding 
participation rights capital).
2.2.2 Cost efficiency
In the reporting year, the cost/income ratio in its broad definition  improved by 
just over 8 percentage points to 59.2% and thus stood far below the long-term 
average of 67.8%.  As in the previous year, this improvement was primarily caused by 
the rise in operating income, which was approximately ten times as strong as the rise in 
general administrative spending in 2023. 47) 
47 General administrative spending in relation to operating income.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 94All of the categories of banks under consideration improved their cost/income ratio 
compared with the previous year. Nevertheless, there were clear differences 
between the categories of banks.  As in 2022, big banks recorded the sharpest decline 
in the cost/income ratio (-20.8 percentage points) out of all the categories of banks 
considered in the reporting year. This was almost exclusively down to the above-
average growth in operating income. All the same, big banks’ cost/income ratio of 
69.0% remained the weakest of all the categories of banks. By comparison, the cost
/income ratio of savings banks fell by just 5.9 percentage points, but, at 56.1%, was 
slightly better than the cost efficiency of the aggregate of all German banks. The 
decline in the cost/income ratio of credit cooperatives totalling 2.2 percentage points 
proved to be the lowest amongst all the categories of banks under consideration. With 
a cost/income ratio of 60.3%, the cost efficiency of credit cooperatives was on par with 
the aggregate in the year under review. The comparatively sharp rise in general  
administrative spending at savings banks and credit cooperatives slowed down the 
improvement in their cost efficiency significantly, even though the operating income of 
both categories of banks increased considerably in the reporting year.


The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 95Category of banksGeneral administrative spending in relation to 
operating income1
2021 2022 2023p
All categories of banks 72.9 67.3 59.2
Commercial banks 79.9 74.6 61.1
      Big banks 99.2 89.8 69.0
      Regional banks and other commercial banks 60.6 60.5 53.0
      Branches of foreign banks 46.2 45.2 38.4
Landesbanken 70.6 62.6 58.4
Savings banks 70.7 62.0 56.1
Credit cooperatives 65.9 62.5 60.3
Mortgage banks 52.5 47.3 42.0
Building and loan associations 93.6 78.2 70.5
Banks with special, development and other central 
support tasks55.5 59.4 56.6
1 Sum of net interest income, net commission income, result from the trading portfolio and other 
operating result.Table 3.5: Cost/income ratios by category of banks
%

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 963 Outlook
German credit institutions’ business environment is likely to remain challenging in 
2024. Although inflation rates declined significantly compared with 2023, and, in June 
2024, the Eurosystem lowered key interest rates again slightly for the first time after 
they had remained unchanged since the last interest rate hike in September 2023, 
major uncertainties regarding future macroeconomic and geopolitical developments 
persist. All in all, German economic output saw hardly any growth in the first and 
second quarters of 2024.
Factors that drag on earnings are likely to gain in importance for German credit 
institutions.  With new lending still muted and sight deposits being shifted into better-
remunerated time deposits, it is probable that the effects on net interest income will 
tend to be negative overall in 2024. Furthermore, counterparty credit risk is expected to 
continue to rise, which renders higher write-downs for non-performing loans at 
German banks more likely. Moreover, additional challenges remain due to 
digitalisation, climate action and cyber risks. Taken by itself, the growing need for 
investment resulting from this will initially have a negative impact on the performance 
of German credit institutions. However, the earnings from 2023 stand the institutions in 
good stead for the investment and risk provisioning that are needed. 48) 
48 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2024f).

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 974 List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024a), Annual Report, 2023.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024b), Monthly Report, February 2024.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024c), Changes in bank office statistics in 2023, press release 
of 13 May 2024.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024d), Developments in loans to enterprises in Germany since 
the start of the monetary policy tightening cycle, Monthly Report, July 2024, Chapter 4.1.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024e), Forecast for Germany: German economy slowly 
regaining its footing – outlook up to 2026, Monthly Report, June 2024, Chapter 1.3.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024f), Overview, Monthly Report, August 2024, Chapter 3.1.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a), Financial Stability Review, 2023.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b), Monthly Report, May 2023.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023c), Monthly Report, August 2023.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023d), Monthly Report, November 2023.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023e), Monthly Report, June 2023.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023f), Monthly Report, September 2023.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2013), Financial Stability Review, 2013.
Institute of Public Auditors in Germany (2012), Stellungnahme des 
Bankenfachausschusses BFA 3 „Einzelfragen der verlustfreien Bewertung von 
zinsbezogenen Geschäften des Bankbuchs (Zinsbuchs)“ of 30 August 2012.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 98Financial 
yearAll 
categories 
of banksCommercial banks
Landes-
banken
3Savings 
banks3Credit 
cooperativesMortgage 
banks3Building 
and loan 
associations Totalof which:
Big 
banks
3Regional 
banks and 
other 
commercial 
banks3
  Interest received4
2017 2.00 1.54 1.26 2.25 2.74 2.42 2.33 3.35 2.63
2018 2.07 1.82 1.62 2.45 3.10 2.17 2.13 2.99 2.42
2019 1.91 1.58 1.41 2.09 3.23 2.03 2.00 2.80 2.34
2020 1.53 1.13 0.92 1.74 2.79 1.78 1.77 2.49 2.11
2021 1.39 0.98 0.90 1.21 2.93 1.58 1.63 2.35 1.92
2022 1.57 1.26 1.38 1.17 2.94 1.67 1.68 2.39 1.74
2023 3.10 2.78 3.02 2.41 6.53 2.63 2.40 3.58 2.15
  Interest paid
2017 0.97 0.66 0.58 0.89 2.02 0.56 0.43 2.78 1.47
2018 0.99 0.82 0.77 0.98 2.43 0.44 0.33 2.25 1.29
2019 0.94 0.74 0.76 0.73 2.61 0.42 0.30 1.99 1.32
2020 0.65 0.40 0.37 0.52 2.17 0.30 0.21 1.65 1.07
2021 0.52 0.23 0.27 0.20 2.28 0.27 0.16 1.43 0.91
2022 0.71 0.54 0.71 0.33 2.31 0.21 0.16 1.49 0.73
2023 2.10 1.99 2.36 1.41 5.83 0.75 0.65 2.62 0.98
  Excess of interest received over interest paid = net interest income (interest margin)
2017 1.04 0.87 0.68 1.36 0.73 1.87 1.90 0.58 1.16
2018 1.07 1.00 0.84 1.47 0.67 1.73 1.80 0.74 1.13
2019 0.97 0.84 0.65 1.36 0.62 1.61 1.70 0.81 1.03
2020 0.88 0.73 0.55 1.23 0.62 1.47 1.56 0.84 1.04
2021 0.87 0.75 0.63 1.01 0.64 1.31 1.47 0.91 1.00
2022 0.86 0.72 0.67 0.84 0.63 1.47 1.53 0.90 1.01
2023 1.00 0.79 0.66 1.00 0.71 1.89 1.75 0.96 1.18
  Excess of commissions received over commissions paid = net commission income (commission margin)
2017 0.37 0.45 0.43 0.54 0.13 0.64 0.57 − 0.02 − 0.21
2018 0.36 0.43 0.45 0.40 0.13 0.63 0.57 − 0.03 − 0.21
2019 0.37 0.42 0.41 0.48 0.14 0.64 0.57 − 0.05 − 0.23
2020 0.35 0.39 0.34 0.55 0.13 0.62 0.55 − 0.05 − 0.20Table 3.6: Major components of credit institutions’ profit and loss accounts by category of banks1
As a percentage of average total assets for the year2

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 99Financial 
yearAll 
categories 
of banksCommercial banks
Landes-
banken
3Savings 
banks3Credit 
cooperativesMortgage 
banks3Building 
and loan 
associations Totalof which:
Big 
banks
3Regional 
banks and 
other 
commercial 
banks3
2021 0.40 0.49 0.45 0.61 0.15 0.61 0.55 − 0.06 − 0.16
2022 0.36 0.39 0.38 0.44 0.16 0.61 0.54 − 0.04 − 0.07
2023 0.35 0.37 0.38 0.38 0.15 0.65 0.54 − 0.03 − 0.07
  General administrative spending
2017 1.07 1.14 1.06 1.41 0.71 1.69 1.66 0.38 0.83
2018 1.09 1.17 1.15 1.32 0.69 1.65 1.59 0.42 0.82
2019 1.06 1.16 1.12 1.32 0.66 1.61 1.55 0.40 0.77
2020 0.95 0.98 0.91 1.24 0.62 1.47 1.45 0.37 0.78
2021 0.97 1.07 1.09 1.14 0.64 1.36 1.37 0.37 0.80
2022 0.90 0.92 0.95 0.95 0.61 1.34 1.35 0.40 0.85
2023 0.91 0.89 0.93 0.90 0.62 1.45 1.44 0.41 0.83
  Result from the trading portfolio
2017 0.07 0.12 0.15 0.03 0.11 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
2018 0.04 0.07 0.09 0.03 0.08 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
2019 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.02 0.05 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
2020 0.04 0.07 0.07 0.06 0.05 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
2021 0.05 0.09 0.08 0.11 0.10 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
2022 0.09 0.14 0.15 0.14 0.18 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
2023 0.11 0.21 0.24 0.18 0.11 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
  Operating result before valuation of assets
2017 0.42 0.30 0.13 0.67 0.27 0.83 0.86 0.16 0.42
2018 0.40 0.31 0.16 0.68 0.21 0.77 0.81 0.28 0.11
2019 0.33 0.21 - 0.01 0.73 0.18 0.65 0.76 0.38 0.04
2020 0.36 0.28 0.10 0.75 0.20 0.62 0.71 0.39 0.07
2021 0.36 0.27 0.01 0.74 0.27 0.56 0.71 0.34 0.05
2022 0.43 0.31 0.11 0.62 0.36 0.82 0.81 0.45 0.24
2023 0.63 0.57 0.42 0.80 0.44 1.13 0.95 0.57 0.35
  Result from the valuation of assets
2017 - 0.04 - 0.02 0.03 - 0.12 - 0.24 0.02 - 0.02 0.01 - 0.03
2018 - 0.08 - 0.06 - 0.02 - 0.16 - 0.33 - 0.06 - 0.10 - 0.15 0.01
2019 - 0.08 - 0.16 - 0.19 - 0.10 - 0.04 - 0.02 0.04 - 0.05 0.02
2020 - 0.14 - 0.21 - 0.19 - 0.26 - 0.07 - 0.14 - 0.07 - 0.15 - 0.03

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 100Financial 
yearAll 
categories 
of banksCommercial banks
Landes-
banken
3Savings 
banks3Credit 
cooperativesMortgage 
banks3Building 
and loan 
associations Totalof which:
Big 
banks
3Regional 
banks and 
other 
commercial 
banks3
2021 - 0.04 - 0.06 - 0.03 - 0.12 - 0.01 - 0.01 0.00 - 0.07 - 0.01
2022 - 0.15 - 0.10 - 0.03 - 0.20 - 0.16 - 0.30 - 0.35 - 0.13 - 0.05
2023 - 0.10 - 0.09 - 0.09 - 0.09 - 0.09 - 0.20 - 0.10 - 0.24 - 0.04
  Operating result
2017 0.37 0.28 0.16 0.55 0.03 0.85 0.84 0.17 0.40
2018 0.32 0.25 0.14 0.51 - 0.12 0.71 0.71 0.14 0.11
2019 0.26 0.05 - 0.20 0.63 0.14 0.62 0.80 0.32 0.06
2020 0.22 0.07 - 0.09 0.49 0.13 0.48 0.63 0.24 0.04
2021 0.32 0.21 - 0.02 0.62 0.26 0.55 0.71 0.27 0.05
2022 0.28 0.22 0.08 0.42 0.21 0.52 0.46 0.32 0.19
2023 0.53 0.48 0.33 0.71 0.35 0.93 0.84 0.32 0.31
  Other and extraordinary result
2017 - 0.04 - 0.10 - 0.05 - 0.23 0.07 - 0.01 0.00 0.03 0.04
2018 - 0.08 - 0.14 - 0.09 - 0.28 - 0.01 - 0.06 - 0.02 - 0.04 - 0.01
2019 - 0.19 - 0.43 - 0.50 - 0.31 - 0.05 0.00 - 0.02 - 0.09 0.13
2020 - 0.06 - 0.14 - 0.12 - 0.18 - 0.07 - 0.01 - 0.02 0.11 0.04
2021 - 0.04 - 0.10 - 0.04 - 0.21 - 0.07 - 0.01 - 0.01 0.45 0.02
2022 - 0.02 0.01 0.14 - 0.17 0.00 - 0.11 - 0.07 - 0.09 - 0.05
2023 - 0.07 - 0.13 - 0.02 - 0.28 - 0.04 - 0.02 - 0.05 0.01 - 0.10
  Profit or loss (-) for the financial year before tax
2017 0.33 0.18 0.12 0.32 0.10 0.84 0.84 0.21 0.43
2018 0.23 0.10 0.05 0.23 - 0.13 0.65 0.69 0.09 0.11
2019 0.07 - 0.39 - 0.71 0.32 0.10 0.63 0.78 0.23 0.19
2020 0.16 - 0.07 - 0.22 0.30 0.06 0.48 0.62 0.35 0.08
2021 0.29 0.11 - 0.06 0.41 0.19 0.54 0.70 0.72 0.07
2022 0.26 0.23 0.23 0.24 0.21 0.41 0.39 0.23 0.13
2023 0.46 0.36 0.31 0.43 0.32 0.92 0.80 0.33 0.21
  Profit or loss (-) for the financial year after tax
2017 0.24 0.13 0.09 0.20 0.05 0.60 0.58 0.13 0.37
2018 0.15 0.08 0.05 0.13 - 0.20 0.44 0.47 0.04 0.05
2019 - 0.03 - 0.45 - 0.75 0.20 0.07 0.44 0.56 0.16 0.15
2020 0.06 - 0.13 - 0.25 0.18 0.04 0.30 0.42 0.06 0.04

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 101Financial 
yearAll 
categories 
of banksCommercial banks
Landes-
banken
3Savings 
banks3Credit 
cooperativesMortgage 
banks3Building 
and loan 
associations Totalof which:
Big 
banks
3Regional 
banks and 
other 
commercial 
banks3
2021 0.18 0.06 - 0.06 0.26 0.11 0.36 0.52 0.24 0.02
2022 0.21 0.23 0.30 0.13 0.12 0.24 0.29 0.14 0.08
2023 0.34 0.27 0.30 0.24 0.21 0.64 0.58 0.21 0.10
1 The figures for the most recent date should be regarded as provisional in all cases.  Excluding the total assets of the foreign 2
branches of savings banks; as of 2020, excluding the total assets of the foreign branches of credit cooperatives, excluding the 
total assets of the foreign branches of mortgage banks, and in 2021 and 2022, excluding the total assets of the foreign 
branches of banks with special, development and other central support tasks.    From 2018, DB Privat- und 3
Firmenkundenbank AG allocated to the category “Big banks”, merger with Deutsche Bank AG in 2020. From 2018, HSH 
Nordbank (now Hamburg Commercial Bank AG) allocated to the category “Regional banks and other commercial banks” and 
Landesbank Berlin allocated to the category “Savings banks”. 2018 to 2021 DSK Hyp AG (formerly SEB AG) allocated to the 
category “Mortgage banks”.  Interest received plus current income and profits transferred under profit pooling, a profit 4
transfer agreement or a partial profit transfer agreement. 
 
Financial 
yearNumber 
of 
reporting 
institutionsAverage
total 
assets
for the
year2Interest business Commissions business
Result
from 
the
trading
portfolioNet
interest
income
(col. 4 
less
col. 5)Interest
received
3Interest
paidNet 
commission
income
(col. 7 less
col. 8)Commissions
receivedCommissions
paid
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
    € billion
2016 1,611 8,355.0 91.1 181.5 90.4 29.7 43.2 13.5
2017 1,538 8,251.2 85.5 165.4 79.9 30.6 44.2 13.6
2018 1,484 8,118.3 87.2 167.8 80.6 29.5 43.1 13.6
2019 1,440 8,532.7 82.5 162.8 80.4 31.2 45.8 14.5
2020 1,408 9,206.9 81.1 140.5 59.4 32.1 46.7 14.5Table 3.7: Credit institutions’ profit and loss accounts1

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 102Financial 
yearNumber 
of 
reporting 
institutionsAverage
total 
assets
for the
year2Interest business Commissions business
Result
from 
the
trading
portfolioNet
interest
income
(col. 4 
less
col. 5)Interest
received
3Interest
paidNet 
commission
income
(col. 7 less
col. 8)Commissions
receivedCommissions
paid
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
2021 1,358 9,476.1 82.2 131.6 49.4 37.9 53.6 15.7
2022 1,302 10,609.2 91.6 167.0 75.4 37.9 54.6 16.7
2023 1,240 10,701.0 106.9 331.4 224.6 37.6 52.7 15.1
  Year-on-year percentage change
2017 -4.5 -1.2 -6.2 -8.9 -11.6 2.7 2.3 1.3
2018 -3.5 -1.6 2.0 1.4 0.8 -3.4 -2.4 -0.2 
2019 -3.0 5.1 -5.4 -3.0 -0.3 5.8 6.1 6.8
2020 -2.2 7.9 -1.7 -13.7 -26.0 2.9 2.0 0.2
2021 -3.6 2.9 1.4 -6.3 -16.8 17.9 14.9 8.2
2022 -4.1 12.0 11.4 26.9 52.6 0.1 1.8 6.1
2023 -4.8 0.9 16.7 98.5 197.7 -0.8 -3.5 -9.6 
  As a percentage of average total assets for the year
2016 . . 1.09 2.17 1.08 0.36 0.52 0.16
2017 . . 1.04 2.00 0.97 0.37 0.54 0.17
2018 . . 1.07 2.07 0.99 0.36 0.53 0.17
2019 . . 0.97 1.91 0.94 0.37 0.54 0.17
2020 . . 0.88 1.53 0.65 0.35 0.51 0.16
2021 . . 0.87 1.39 0.52 0.40 0.57 0.17
2022 . . 0.86 1.57 0.71 0.36 0.51 0.16
2023 . . 1.00 3.10 2.10 0.35 0.49 0.14
1 The figures for the most recent date should be regarded as provisional in all cases.  Excluding the total assets of the foreign branches of savings banks; as of 2020, excluding the total assets of the foreign branches of credit cooperatives, 2
excluding the total assets of the foreign branches of mortgage banks and, in 2021 and 2022, excluding the total assets of the foreign branches of banks with special, development and other central support tasks.  Interest received plus current 3
income and profits transferred under profit pooling, a profit transfer agreement or a partial profit transfer agreement. Sum of net interest income, net commission income, result from the trading portfolio and other operating result.  Including  4 5
depreciation of and value adjustments to tangible and intangible assets, but excluding depreciation of and value adjustments to assets leased (“broad” definition).

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 103                 
Financial 
yearNumber 
of 
reporting 
institutions€ million
Average
total 
assets
for the
year2Interest business Commissions business
Net
interest
income
(col. 4 
less
col. 5)Interest
received
3Interest
paidNet 
commission
income
(col. 7 less
col. 8)Commissions
receivedCommissions
paid
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
  All categories of banks
2018 1,484 8,118,298 87,202 167,777 80,575 29,522 43,124 13,602
2019 1,440 8,532,738 82,453 162,805 80,352 31,244 45,765 14,521
2020 1,408 9,206,853 81,074 140,502 59,428 32,142 46,689 14,547
2021 1,358 9,476,130 82,227 131,647 49,420 37,891 53,625 15,734
2022 1,302 10,609,156 91,575 167,014 75,439 37,923 54,617 16,694
2023 1,240 10,701,001 106,887 331,442 224,555 37,620 52,714 15,094
  Commercial banks
2018 167 3,404,697 34,140 62,134 27,994 14,514 22,145 7,631
2019 165 3,591,261 30,191 56,720 26,529 15,154 23,252 8,098
2020 164 3,966,453 28,807 44,739 15,932 15,439 23,385 7,946
2021 166 3,995,423 29,941 39,134 9,193 19,708 28,382 8,674
2022 157 4,779,020 34,499 60,211 25,712 18,746 28,255 9,509
2023 148 4,885,442 38,583 135,777 97,194 18,132 26,573 8,441
  Big banks8
2018 42,346,111 19,751 37,924 18,173 10,573 13,478 2,905
2019 42,475, 076 16,126 34,920 18,794 10,154 13,650 3,496
2020 32,748,655 15,052 25,257 10,205 9,311 12,495 3,184
2021 32,461,038 15,568 22,111 6,543 11,124 14,085 2,961
2022 32,716, 868 18,138 37,395 19,257 10,278 13,743 3,465
2023 32,760, 665 18,226 83,400 65,174 10,576 13,264 2,688
  Regional and other commercial banks8
2018 145 962,520 14,149 23,562 9,413 3,827 8,543 4,716
2019 142 1,013,378 13,784 21,153 7,369 4,864 9,456 4,592Table 3.8: Profit and loss accounts by category of banks1

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 104                 
Financial 
yearNumber 
of 
reporting 
institutions€ million
Average
total 
assets
for the
year2Interest business Commissions business
Net
interest
income
(col. 4 
less
col. 5)Interest
received
3Interest
paidNet 
commission
income
(col. 7 less
col. 8)Commissions
receivedCommissions
paid
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
2020 139 1,094,301 13,435 19,073 5,638 6,015 10,759 4,744
2021 139 1,382,623 13,956 16,740 2,784 8,496 14,160 5,664
2022 129 1,895,932 15,954 22,128 6,174 8,365 14,363 5,998
2023 121 1,967,187 19,703 47,349 27,646 7,458 13,148 5,690
  Branches of foreign banks
2018 18 96,066 240 648 408 114 124 10
2019 19 102,807 281 647 366 136 146 10
2020 22 123,497 320 409 89 113 131 18
2021 24 151,762 417 283 -134 88 137 49
2022 25 166,220 407 688 281 103 149 46
2023 24 157,590 654 5,028 4,374 98 161 63
  Landesbanken8
2018 6 803,978 5,365 24,895 19,530 1,074 2,408 1,334
2019 6 862,346 5,327 27,818 22,491 1,226 2,617 1,391
2020 6 898,328 5,559 25,055 19,496 1,152 2,697 1,545
2021 6 905,608 5,826 26,496 20,670 1,326 3,118 1,792
2022 6 977,020 6,178 28,753 22,575 1,526 3,152 1,626
2023 61,000,033 7,056 65,309 58,253 1,503 3,095 1,592
  Savings banks8
2018 386 1,267,726 21,949 27,541 5,592 7,965 8,778 813
2019 380 1,315,579 21,217 26,758 5,541 8,458 9,405 947
2020 377 1,407,118 20,741 24,986 4,245 8,660 9,646 986
2021 371 1,516,119 19,873 23,966 4,093 9,242 10,309 1,067
2022 362 1,573,071 23,065 26,326 3,261 9,673 10,745 1,072
2023 354 1,556,061 29,344 40,943 11,599 10,039 10,980 941
  Credit cooperatives
2018 875 911,385 16,375 19,424 3,049 5,160 6,318 1,158

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 105                 
Financial 
yearNumber 
of 
reporting 
institutions€ million
Average
total 
assets
for the
year2Interest business Commissions business
Net
interest
income
(col. 4 
less
col. 5)Interest
received
3Interest
paidNet 
commission
income
(col. 7 less
col. 8)Commissions
receivedCommissions
paid
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
2019 841 957,859 16,251 19,151 2,900 5,456 6,718 1,262
2020 814 1,029,671 16,027 18,239 2,212 5,663 6,955 1,292
2021 770 1,108,885 16,326 18,122 1,796 6,141 7,507 1,366
2022 733 1,165,801 17,829 19,638 1,809 6,242 7,570 1,328
2023 693 1,160,222 20,337 27,901 7,564 6,270 7,557 1,287
  Mortgage banks8
2018 11 233,165 1,732 6,975 5,243 - 80 97 177
2019 10 234,978 1,908 6,576 4,668 -109  116 225
2020 10 241,909 2,024 6,020 3,996 -123 109 232
2021 9 232,447 2,121 5,452 3,331 -144  122 266
2022 8 235,064 2,117 5,620 3,503 -102  121 223
2023 7 225,456 2,170 8,078 5,908 -70 85 155
  Building and loan associations
2018 20 233,865 2,653 5,661 3,008 -500  1,295 1,795
2019 19 237,363 2,438 5,566 3,128 -548 1,309 1,857
2020 18 242,190 2,520 5,103 2,583 -493  1,270 1,763
2021 18 249,553 2,505 4,785 2,280 - 389 1,295 1,684
2022 18 259,381 2,607 4,508 1,901 -174 1,834 2,008
2023 14 244,652 2,876 5,268 2,392 -178  1,565 1,743
  Banks with special, development and other central support tasks  
2018 19 1,263,482 4,988 21,147 16,159 1,389 2,083 694
2019 19 1,333 ,52 5,121 20,216 15,095 1,607 2,348 741
2020 19 1,421,184 5,396 16,360 10,964 1,844 2,627 783
2021 18 1,468,095 5,635 13,692 8,057 2,007 2,892 885
2022 18 1,619,799 5,280 21,958 16,678 2,012 2,940 928
2023 18 1,629,135 6,521 48,166 41,645 1,924 2,859 935
Memo item: banks majority-owned by foreign banks

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 106                 
Financial 
yearNumber 
of 
reporting 
institutions€ million
Average
total 
assets
for the
year2Interest business Commissions business
Net
interest
income
(col. 4 
less
col. 5)Interest
received
3Interest
paidNet 
commission
income
(col. 7 less
col. 8)Commissions
receivedCommissions
paid
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
  9      
2018 33 763,177 9,252 12,327 3,075 3,042 4,711 1,669
2019 32 849,008 9,683 12,911 3,228 3,520 5,338 1,818
2020 34 973,655 9,350 11,328 1,978 4,640 6,756 2,116
2021 35 1,236,335 9,238 10,296 1,058 6,858 9,737 2,879
2022 31 1,872,399 10,869 15,104 4,235 7,018 10,163 3,145
2023 29 2,022,854 12,472 35,377 22,905 6,712 9,601 2,889
1 The figures for the most recent date should be regarded as provisional in all cases.  Excluding the total assets of the foreign branches of savings banks; as of 2020, excluding the total assets of the foreign branches of credit cooperatives, excluding the total assets of the foreign 2
branches of mortgage banks and, in 2021 and 2022, excluding the total assets of the foreign branches of banks with special, development and other central support tasks.  Interest received plus current income and profits transferred under profit pooling, a profit transfer 3
agreement or a partial profit transfer agreement.  Sum of net interest income, net commission income, result from the trading portfolio and other operating result.  Including depreciation of and value adjustments to tangible and intangible assets, but excluding depreciation of 4 5
and value adjustments to assets leased (“broad” definition).  In part, including taxes paid by legally dependent building and loan associations affiliated to Landesbanken.  Including profit or loss brought forward and withdrawals from or transfers to the fund for general banking 6 7
risks.  From 2018, DB Privat- und Firmenkundenbank AG allocated to the category “Big banks”, merger with Deutsche Bank AG in 2020. From 2018, HSH Nordbank (now Hamburg Commercial Bank AG) allocated to the category “Regional banks and other commercial banks” and 8
Landesbank Berlin allocated to the category “Savings banks”. 2018 to 2021 DSK Hyp AG (formerly SEB AG) allocated to the category “Mortgage banks”.  Separate presentation of the (legally independent) banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in other categories of 9
banks.

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 107Financial 
yearNumber 
of 
reporting 
institutionsCharges, € billion
TotalInterest 
paidCommissions 
paidNet loss 
from 
the 
trading 
portfolioGross loss 
on 
transactions 
in goods 
and 
subsidiary 
transactionsGeneral administrative spending
TotalStaff costs
TotalWages 
and 
salariesSocial security 
costs and 
costs relating 
to pensions 
and other 
benefits
Total
2015 1,679 256.6 105.0 14.1 0.5 0.0 86.0 46.0 36.4 9.6
2016 1,611 240.9 90.4 13.5 0.2 0.0 84.4 44.6 36.1 8.6
2017 1,538 224.1 79.9 13.6 0.0 0.0 84.0 44.6 35.6 8.9
2018 1,484 226.9 80.6 13.6 0.0 0.0 83.6 44.3 34.6 9.7
2019 1,440 242.0 80.4 14.5 0.1 0.0 84.8 44.4 34.9 9.6
2020 1,408 211.0 59.4 14.5 0.1 0.0 82.6 44.2 34.7 9.5
2021 1,358 204.0 49.4 15.7 0.0 0.0 87.1 46.7 36.4 10.3
2022 1,302 247.9 75.4 16.7 0.0 0.0 90.5 48.4 36.6 11.9
2023 1,240 392.8 224.6 15.1 0.0 0.0 92.3 48.6 38.2 10.4
1 The figures for the most recent date should be regarded as provisional in all cases. Spending item does not include depreciation of and value adjustments to tangible and intangible assets, shown net of depreciation of assets leased (“narrow” 2 
definition). All other tables are based on a broad definition of “other administrative spending”.Table 3.9: Credit institutions’ charge items1

The performance of German credit institutions in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 108Financial 
yearIncome, € billion
TotalInterest received Current incomeProfits 
transferred 
under 
profit 
pooling, a 
profit 
transfer 
agreement 
or a partial 
profit 
transfer 
agreement Totalfrom 
lending 
and money 
market 
transactionsfrom 
debt 
securities 
and debt 
register 
claims Totalfrom 
shares 
and 
other 
variable 
yield 
securitiesfrom 
participating 
interests2from 
shares in 
affiliated 
enterprises
2015 274.7 183.1 160.1 22.9 15.0 6.7 1.8 6.5 2.8
2016 260.8 166.8 147.1 19.7 10.0 5.8 1.3 2.9 4.7
2017 244.1 151.0 134.4 16.5 11.0 6.9 1.1 3.0 3.4
2018 239.1 152.4 136.9 15.5 10.0 5.3 1.1 3.5 5.4
2019 239.8 152.2 137.5 14.7 7.6 4.8 1.1 1.7 3.0
2020 216.9 131.4 119.1 12.3 6.0 3.5 0.6 1.9 3.2
2021 221.2 121.8 111.8 10.0 7.1 4.0 1.3 1.7 2.7
2022 269.7 156.5 144.7 11.7 8.1 3.9 1.2 3.0 2.4
2023 428.9 320.6 294.9 25.6 7.9 3.8 1.4 2.8 2.9
 The figures for the most recent date should be regarded as provisional in all cases.  Including amounts paid up on cooperative society shares. 1 2Table 3.10: Credit institutions‘ income items1

109DORA from the 
perspective of on-site 
inspections
Monthly Report – September 2024

DORA from the perspective of on-site inspections
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 110The significance of digitalisation has grown considerably in the financial industry. 
However, data as well as information and communication technologies  are not ()ICT
only drivers of progress, but also sources of material risk. Interconnections and 
dependencies within the financial sector as well as between financial entities  and  ICT
third-party service providers have intensified, making them more vulnerable to system-
wide disruptions. In this context, financial entities that provide essential services to 
national economies are confronted with mounting threats from cyber attacks and  ICT
disruptions. One prominent example was the major global disruption in July 2024 
caused by a third-party provider rolling out a faulty update to a widely used  product.ICT
These risks – which arise from the critical roles played by digital systems, their 
increasing dependencies, and the myriad threats that they face – cannot be caught by 
conventional financial safety nets. In Germany, the appropriate risk management  
required by the Banking Act ( ), and thus the regulatory expectations Kreditwesengesetz
for banks, have been set out, in particular, by the circulars issued by the Federal 
Financial Supervisory Authority  on the Minimum Requirements for Risk ( ) BaFin
Management ( ) since 2005 Mindestanforderungen an das Risikomanagement – MaRisk
and on the Supervisory Requirements for  in Financial Institutions (IT Bankaufsichtliche 
) since 2017, before the European Banking Authority Anforderungen an die IT – BAIT (
 published its own Guidelines on  and security risk management in 2019. In )EBA ICT
practice, in addition to tangible progress, vulnerabilities are still regularly apparent 
and, due to the dynamically evolving threat situation, there is a continual need for 
improvement in banks’ operations, development and security of  systems, and  ICT ICT
risk management. This is revealed by the Bundesbank’s supervisory inspections of 
banks and their  third-party service providers.ICT
The introduction of the Digital Operational Resilience Act  marks a major turning ( ) DORA
point in the management of  risks and  third-party services. The  ICT ICT DORA
requirements for digital operational resilience, alongside the other provisions set out in 
the Regulation, are essential and necessary to adequately shore up the stability of the 
financial sector in regulatory terms. As European legislators are harmonising the 
requirements for digital operational resilience across the European Union  and ()EU
throughout the entire financial sector, existing national and sector-specific frameworks, 
including  are being replaced, which is intended to improve the efficiency and , BAIT
cohesion of risk management in the  financial sector.EU 1) 
 2) 
1 Pursuant to  Article 2(2), the entities listed in  Article 2(1), points (a) to (t) shall collectively be DORA DORA
referred to as “financial entities”; these include, inter alia, credit institutions, payment institutions, account 
information service providers, electronic money institutions, investment firms, crypto-asset service providers, 
and issuers of asset-referenced tokens.
2 These include, for example, private and public deposit guarantee schemes.

DORA from the perspective of on-site inspections
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 111The aim of  is to strengthen the resilience of the financial sector and establish a DORA
common level of protection. By adopting technical and organisational measures, 
financial entities must ensure that they can maintain business continuity and resume 
normal operations even in the event of a severe related incident. In future, the -ICT
Bundesbank’s special  on-site inspections of banks and their  third-party DORA ICT
service providers will therefore cover governance and organisation,  risk ICT
management frameworks including  third-party risk, as well as the necessary  ICT ICT
systems, protocols and tools. However, supervisory focus is also increasingly turning to 
the treatment, classification and reporting of related incidents, as well as the -ICT
testing of the digital operational resilience of financial entities. In its ongoing 
supervision of financial entities’ implementation of  requirements, the DORA
Bundesbank is able to build on its many years of experience and will make targeted use 
of its expertise and findings from supervisory inspections. Financial entities are called 
upon to implement robust  risk management frameworks that cover all aspects of ICT
digital operational resilience and include  third-party service providers.ICT

DORA from the perspective of on-site inspections
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 1121  risks at the focus of financial supervisionICT
ICT risks are increasingly posing a challenge to financial institutions. Financial 
institutions and other financial market participants make extensive use of information 
and communication technologies to provide services that are crucial to the national 
economy. To this end, they are increasingly integrating  services provided by third ICT
parties into their business models and internal processes. Increasing digitalisation also 
increases  risk, making the financial system more susceptible to cyber attacks and ICT
 disruptions. In the event of financial distress, financial buffers or sector-specific ICT
mechanisms, for example, can be used to stabilise a financial institution’s liquidity or 
solvency in order to prevent systemic contagion to other financial market participants. 
The same does not apply in the event of related disruptions.  disruptions cannot -ICT ICT
be overcome using financial buffers alone; the affected institution must instead prevent 
the corresponding damage by implementing technical and organisational measures 
that allow it to maintain business continuity and resume normal operations even in the 
event of a major incident. For instance, financial buffers are of no use in decrypting 
customer data that have been encrypted as part of a ransomware attack. Instead, it 
must be ensured that such attacks do not have any contagion effects on backups, 
which necessitates sufficiently effective physical or logical separation between systems 
and their backups. In this context, financial institutions need to develop special skills 
and implement processes such as contingency and recovery plans. These were also 
recently reviewed in the cyber resilience stress test conducted by the European Central 
Bank  which covered 109 banks across the entire Single Supervisory Mechanism ( ),ECB (
 subjecting them to a scenario of a severe but plausible cybersecurity incident.), SSM
ICT risks are also increasingly arising from severe cyber threats with high risks of 
damage.  The number of related incidents reported to supervisors by significant -ICT
institutions in the  as well as the number of reports of major payment security SSM
incidents in Germany  reports) remain largely constant, despite the rising threats (PSD2
over the past few years. Two decades ago, however, risks in the area of  were ICT
limited mainly to disruptions that, whilst impacting on work and customer satisfaction, 
had little potential for damage. The majority of  reports still concern operational PSD2
errors or updates to  systems. That said, the threat scenarios have changed ICT 3) 
3 See  and , last accessed on 23 August 2024. bankingsupervision.europa.eu bankingsupervision.europa.eu

DORA from the perspective of on-site inspections
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 113significantly: organised crime and mounting geopolitical tensions have made cyber 
attacks a serious danger with considerably greater potential for damage. In 2023, for 
example, the customer account data of various banks were stolen from an account 
switching service provider by a hacking attack.  More recently, the number of  ICT
incidents resulting from exploits of vulnerabilities has grown: in such cases, attackers 
are able to infect the targeted infrastructures with malicious code. The substantial 
increase in the number of instances of unauthorised access also suggests that there is 
room for improvement in security information and event management  in ( ) SIEM
order to effectively prevent unauthorised access to data or changes to authorisations.
 4) 
 5) 
 6) 
4 See , last accessed on 26 August 2024. handelsblatt.com
5 A  system is a system that gathers, analyses and monitors security information and events (such as SIEM
instances of access, for example) within an  infrastructure. See , last accessed on 26 August 2024. ICT csrc.nist.gov
6 In a distributed denial of service  attack, instead of a single attacking system, a large number of ( ) DDoS
different  systems are used to conduct a large-scale coordinated attack. Via mass requests, e.g. to a website or ICT
server, the attack attempts to overload the targeted system. These attacks are particularly effective due to the 
large number of systems attacking simultaneously. See , last accessed on 26 August 2024. bsi.bund.de

DORA from the perspective of on-site inspections
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 114Digitalisation and interconnectivity also pose risks to financial stability. The 
digitalisation of the financial sector also entails stronger interconnectivity within the 
sector as well as fundamental dependencies on  third-party service providers. Due ICT
to their impact on the entire financial sector, cyber attacks and disruptions affecting  ICT
third-party providers and the widespread use of particular  products or  services ICT ICT
represent a growing threat to financial stability. A recent example of this was the major 
global disruption in July 2024 triggered by an update to a product from the company 
CrowdStrike. This affected more than eight million devices worldwide and had a 
negative impact on functions – in some cases critical and important functions – at 
hundreds of enterprises, including financial institutions.  These global repercussions 
clearly illustrate the interconnectedness of the financial industry as a whole as well as 
the degree of dependence on  third-party service providers. In this context, the ICT
actual risks may be even greater than they appear at first glance, as  third-party ICT
service providers themselves increase concentration risks by sub-outsourcing to the 
same critical  third-party service providers or because the supply chains for the ICT
procured  services are not sufficiently monitored.ICT
 7) 
7 See, for example, Tremmel (2024).

DORA from the perspective of on-site inspections
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 1152 Implications of  for financial supervision DORA
2.1 Looking back – national sector-specific oversight of  risksICT
The traditional approach to managing operational risks is aimed, in particular, at 
maintaining sufficient capital for a loss event.  In addition, the qualitative 
requirements of an appropriate risk management framework must ensure that both 
the probability of occurrence and the amount of damage caused by  incidents are ICT
limited to such an extent that resilience is guaranteed at all times. In Germany, the 
appropriate risk management required by the Banking Act ( ), and Kreditwesengesetz
thus the regulatory expectations for banks with regard to appropriate technical and 
organisational measures as well as contingency management for  systems, have ICT
been set out by the circulars issued by the Federal Financial Supervisory Authority (
 on the Minimum Requirements for Risk Management () BaFin Mindestanforderungen an 
) since 2005 and on the Supervisory Requirements for das Risikomanagement  – MaRisk
 in Financial Institutions ( ) since IT Bankaufsichtliche Anforderungen an die IT – BAIT
2017. This was the case before the European Banking Authority  published its own ( )EBA
Guidelines on  and security risk management in 2019. These guidelines were ICT
implemented by  in close cooperation with the Bundesbank, in amendments to , BaFin
 and  This occurred again in 2021 in the circular on Payment Services MaRisk . BAIT
Regulatory Requirements for  (ITZahlungsdiensteaufsichtliche Anforderungen an die IT
).  – ZAIT
The Bundesbank’s inspections show that, despite significant progress made by 
institutions, there is an ongoing need for action in ICT risk management due to the 
dynamic threat situation. For more than a decade, the Bundesbank has regularly been 
mandated with carrying out special on-site supervisory inspections, which cover proper 
business organisation in accordance with Sections 25a and 25b of the Banking Act in 
conjunction with  and  or Section 27 of the Payment Services Oversight Act ( MaRisk BAIT
) in conjunction with  for financial institutions Zahlungsdiensteaufsichtsgesetz  – ZAG ZAIT
and their  third-party service providers. During this time, the level of maturity of  ICT ICT
risk management at the inspected enterprises, including the management of  8) 
8 See, for example, , last accessed on 16 August 2024. bundesbank.de

DORA from the perspective of on-site inspections
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 116outsourcing risks, has risen considerably across the board. However, in light of the 
mounting threats, the requirements placed on  risk management have also ICT
increased. Despite the progress that has been made, inspections continue to reveal 
significant vulnerabilities, critical problem areas and an ongoing need for improvement 
with regard to the management of  risks. For instance, out of the inspection findings ICT
from the essential areas of  risk management in 2023, more than half were ICT
classified as “major” or “critical”.
2.2 Looking ahead –   as a cross-sectoral  Regulation DORA EU
A key objective of DORA  is to strengthen the digital operational resilience of the 
entire financial sector in the .EU In particular, financial entities should establish robust 
mechanisms against cyber attacks and  disruptions among financial market ICT
participants and  third-party service providers to guarantee a common level of ICT
protection. In addition,  obligates the three European Supervisory Authorities  DORA (
 to produce drafts for joint regulatory technical standards and implementing ) ESAs
technical standards for  and then present these to the European Commission. At DORA
the same time, the European Commission has the power to supplement  with DORA
these standards or to adopt these standards.
Due to the harmonisation of the most important requirements for digital 
operational resilience by European legislators, the national sectoral requirements 
for IT security in the German financial sector are being repealed.  This affects both 
 and  Although the authority to regulate all elements of digital operational BAIT . ZAIT
resilience lies with European legislators, German financial supervisors, as part of the 
Joint Committees of the  participate in the development process for regulatory , ESAs
technical standards and implementing technical standards as well as in the Q&A 
processes for . DORA
DORA  strengthens operational resilience requirements to ensure the stability of key 
financial functions. DORA  requires financial institutions to implement resilient  risk ICT
management frameworks. In the German financial sector, there are already high 
supervisory expectations of  security in accordance with   and  At the IT , MaRisk BAIT . ZAIT
same time, with its focus on digital operational resilience,  is introducing DORA 9) 
 10) 
 11) 9 These are the European Banking Authority  the European Securities and Markets Authority  and ( ),EBA ( ), ESMA
the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority ( ). EIOPA
10 See “Start getting ready for  now”, , last accessed on 16 August 2024. DORA bafin.de

DORA from the perspective of on-site inspections
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 117expanded requirements and new priorities in this regard.  These aim to ensure not 
only that potential damage from  disruptions is avoided or reduced to a tolerable ICT
level, but also, in particular, that critical and important functions of financial entities can 
continue or be quickly resumed even in the event of a crisis. This should guarantee the 
integrity and proper functioning of the financial market under any circumstances.
2.3 Learning areas for future  inspections DORA
2.3.1 Governance and organisation
Financial institutions are called upon to implement effective governance structures 
and organisational forms for managing ICT risks.  The  risk management ICT
framework required for this must cover key elements of digital operational resilience, 
including identification, protection and prevention, detection, response and recovery, 
and backup and restoration. These elements should be reinforced by reliable and 
resilient  systems as well as with sound protocols and tools. In light of the constantly ICT
evolving cyber threats, ongoing training for all staff and continuous further 
development of risk management approaches are necessary. In the event of a cyber 
attack or  incident, clear and comprehensive communication with all relevant ICT
stakeholders, including supervisory authorities, customers and the general public, is 
essential. Supplementary regulatory technical standards specify the requirements for 
certain areas of  risk management in greater detail.ICT
ICT competence in management bodies will be indispensable.  The management 
body of an institution, which, in the case of credit and payment institutions, consists of 
the management board and the supervisory board, bears  full and ultimate
responsibility for the appropriate management of  risks. This includes, amongst ICT
 11) 
 12) 
11 See the results of the working groups of industry, the Deutsche Bundesbank and BaFin  in Hinweise zur 
Umsetzung von DORA  im -IKTRisikomanagement und -IKTDrittparteienrisikomanagement, bafin.de , last accessed 
on 16 August 2024.
12 See Commission Delegated Regulation  2024/1774 on  specifying  risk management tools, ()EU RTS ICT
methods, processes, and policies and the simplified  risk management framework  L, 25 June 2024) and ICT (OJ
Commission Delegated Regulation  2024/1773 on  specifying the detailed content of the policy regarding ()EU RTS
contractual arrangements on the use of  services supporting critical or important functions provided by  ICT ICT
third-party service providers  L, 25 June 2024).(OJ

DORA from the perspective of on-site inspections
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 118other things, defining strategic objectives for the institution’s digital operational 
resilience. To do so, the management body itself needs to have sufficient knowledge 
and skills and must constantly keep these up to date so that it can adequately 
understand and assess  risks and their impact on the financial institution. For this ICT
purpose, training courses tailored to the institution’s specific needs should be 
completed at regular intervals.
2.3.2  risk management frameworkICT
Governance and control frameworks are fundamental to the proper management 
of ICT risks. Only a comprehensive  risk management framework set down in ICT
writing can reliably convey the strategic requirements of the management body and 
ensure a high level of digital operational resilience that meets the latest technological 
standards. This framework must include detailed strategies, policies, procedures and 
control mechanisms specifically aimed at identifying, assessing, managing and 
monitoring  risks particular to the institution. In order to keep up with the constantly ICT
changing threat landscape, it is essential to review and update the framework on a 
regular basis – annually at the least. Ad hoc reviews in the event of serious related -ICT
incidents or on the basis of supervisory instructions or findings are also necessary. 
These are vital for the continuous optimisation of the entities’ security strategies and to 
further strengthen their digital operational resilience.
Financial entities should pay particular attention to the  risk management ICT
framework, not least because supervisory   and  inspections have , MaRisk BAIT ZAIT
repeatedly revealed weaknesses in this regard over the past few years, particularly in 
terms of the completeness, level of detail and up-to-dateness of written procedural 
instructions. Under , DORA  financial entities will, in future, be required to provide full 
and up-to-date information on their ICT risks and their ICT risk management 
framework to the competent authorities upon request.
2.3.3  control functionICT
An internal, independent ICT control function is crucial for effectively monitoring ICT
risks and strengthening digital operational resilience. The introduction of  has DORA
changed regulatory requirements. The previous regulations in Germany, which, in 


DORA from the perspective of on-site inspections
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 119accordance with  generally provided for an internal information security officer , BAIT (
 will be replaced by a broader  control function responsible for managing and ),ISO ICT
monitoring  risk. The implementation of an independent  control function is ICT ICT
essential for effective monitoring of  risks and to support the management body.ICT
In order to monitor the institution’s individual ICT landscape, it is vital that the 
responsible control function is well-versed in the processes and products employed.  
Instead of outsourcing this  control function, it is therefore appropriate to keep it ICT
within the institution in order to maximise synergies and ensure a rapid response when 
 incidents occur. The internal anchoring of this function promotes effective control ICT
over  risks and contributes significantly to strengthening the operational digital ICT
resilience of the financial institution.
The ICT control function is to be implemented in line with the three lines of defence 
model  or an internal risk management and control model, and is specifically 
responsible for independent monitoring of ICT risk.  German financial supervisors had 
already enshrined these requirements in the relevant national circulars previously. 
Nevertheless, supervisory inspection findings have repeatedly revealed weaknesses, in 
particular with regard to the necessary independence of this control function, the 
adequacy of reporting channels to the management body, and the availability of the 
requisite resources for the effective performance of tasks.
2.3.4  third-party risk managementICT
Financial entities must retain full control over their ICT risk.  This includes controlling 
the risks arising from the use of  services provided by  third-party service ICT ICT
providers or their subcontractors  third-party risk). This also applies to critical  (ICT ICT
third-party service providers that are subject to the European Oversight Framework 
(see the supplementary information The new  Oversight Framework for critical  EU ICT
). The classification of an  third-party service provider as third-party service providers ICT
“critical” is based on the information registers of financial entities, which contain all 
contractual agreements on  third-party services provided.  focuses on a wide ICT DORA
range of  third-party service providers. These include, inter alia, providers of data ICT
centre services, cloud computing, software and data analysis, but also payment  13) 
13 See European Banking Authority: Final Report on Guidelines on Internal Governance under Directive 2013/36/
, last accessed on 26 August 2024. As the first line of defence, the business areas take risks and are directly and EU
permanently responsible for their operational management. The risk management function and the 
compliance function form the second line of defence. As the third line of defence, the independent internal 
audit function conducts risk-based and general audits and reviews internal governance rules, processes and 
mechanisms to ensure that they are sound and effective and have been correctly implemented and uniformly 
applied.

DORA from the perspective of on-site inspections
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 120services with payment processing activities and payment infrastructure operation. 
While procuring  third-party services from specialised providers can lead to different ICT
or better management of some risks, the increased interconnection with and 
associated dependencies on other entities create additional risks for both the 
institution itself and the financial market as a whole.
Financial entities’ dependencies on individual ICT third-party service providers may 
increase and also result in systemic dependencies in the financial sector.  The 
services offered by  third-party providers are growing dynamically in both breadth ICT
and depth, and are becoming increasingly integrated into financial entities’ value 
chains. This market dynamism also means that some  third-party service providers ICT
are able to gain considerable market power, which puts regulated financial institutions 
in a difficult position at the negotiating table when, for example, it comes to ensuring 
that the information and audit rights required by the supervisory authorities are 
sufficiently implemented or that  risks are properly monitored.ICT
Meeting the regulatory requirements for ICT third-party risk management poses 
enormous challenges for financial entities.   brings with it more comprehensive DORA
and detailed requirements for the management of  third-party risk, in particular. ICT
However, inspections carried out under national sector-specific rules have already 
frequently identified that financial entities are falling short of existing supervisory 
requirements – signing incomplete contracts with  third-party service providers and ICT
failing to sufficiently assess and manage third-party risks.

DORA from the perspective of on-site inspections
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 121Supplementary information
The new EU Oversight Framework for critical ICT third-
party service providers
The Joint Committee of the European Supervisory Authorities  is establishing an ( ) ESAs
Oversight Forum as a subcommittee to support the work of the Joint Committee and 
the Lead Overseers. The Lead Overseer function, performed by one of the three  (i. ESAs
e. the European Banking Authority  the European Insurance and Occupational ( ),EBA
Pensions Authority  or the European Securities and Markets Authority  is ( ) EIOPA ( )) ESMA
the core element of the Oversight Framework for critical  third-party service ICT
providers. Coherent operational collaboration between the Lead Overseers will be 
ensured by the formation of a Joint Oversight Network ( ), which will draw up a JON
common oversight protocol for this purpose.
The Lead Overseers are supported by a Joint Examination Team  which will be set (),JET
up for each critical  third-party service provider. The  will comprise employees of ICT JETs
the  and the competent supervisory authorities supervising the financial entities ESAs
for which the critical  third-party service provider performs  services. The Lead ICT ICT
Overseer is authorised to issue recommendations to a critical  third-party service ICT
provider, while the latter is obliged to comment on these and to address the concerns 
of the former. A critical  third-party service provider should, first and foremost, ICT
cooperate in good faith with the Lead Overseer and assist it in the fulfilment of its 
tasks; however, under  a periodic penalty payment can be imposed on the , DORA
service provider by the Lead Overseer as a last resort. Moreover, in principle, the Lead 
Overseer can publicly report the critical  third-party service provider for not ICT
informing it adequately or in a timely enough manner about how it has handled 
recommendations.
Any mutual interdependencies and highly critical concentrations of  third-party ICT
service providers can be identified by analysing the registers containing information on 
the third-party services provided to the financial entities under supervision. Critical  ICT


DORA from the perspective of on-site inspections
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 122third-party service providers are defined on this basis. The Lead Overseer’s supervisory 
duties are to be carried out while maintaining a continuous dialogue with such  ICT
third-party service providers with regard to their  risk situation. In order to perform ICT
its tasks and supervision activities, the Lead Overseer is entitled to request information 
and conduct general investigations and on-site inspections of the critical  third-party ICT
service providers assigned to it. This involves assessing the management of  risks ICT
that can be transferred from the critical  third-party service provider to the financial ICT
entities because they affect  third-party services that support critical or important ICT
functions of financial entities.
DORA  defines the areas of  risk management that are to be covered by the ICT
assessment of critical  third-party service providers. Such an assessment is based on ICT
an oversight plan and is intended to:
take into account the security, availability, continuity, scalability and quality of 
services;
include the availability, authenticity, integrity and confidentiality of data;
examine the  risk management strategy, the  business continuity policy ICT ICT
and the  response and recovery plans as well as considering the governance ICT
arrangements;
include the processes for related incidents, investigation, monitoring, -ICT
reporting to financial entities, handling and resolution;
include mechanisms for the effective exercise of termination rights by financial 
entities to ensure data portability, application portability and interoperability;
include the testing of  systems, infrastructures and controls;ICT
consider  audits and the adoption of relevant standards.ICT
However, the critical  third-party service providers are not subject to the ICT
requirements that  imposes on the  risk management of financial entities. DORA ICT

DORA from the perspective of on-site inspections
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 1232.3.5 Identification
Effective ICT risk management requires complete and up-to-date information on ICT 
assets.  Effective  risk management can only be achieved if the underlying ICT
information is up-to-date and correct. Only those who are familiar with the functions it 
entails and the assets at its disposal can protect these from risks in a targeted manner. 
It is therefore essential to precisely identify both specific  risks and critical and ICT
important functions. Strategic requirements and the specific business model must also 
be taken into account. The  systems and data supporting these critical and ICT
important functions must demonstrate a high degree of digital operational resilience. 
In order to ensure high standards of availability, authenticity, integrity and 
confidentiality, clear criteria must be established for assessing the criticality of data and 
 systems. This requires comprehensive and up-to-date information on data and  ICT ICT
assets as well as on their interdependencies. Bundesbank inspections have repeatedly 
identified shortcomings in the scope and completeness of impact and criticality 
analyses (also known as protection needs analyses) and in keeping information on  ICT
assets up to date. In the future, financial entities will have to keep appropriate 
inventories of their  assets and risks and update them both regularly and in the ICT
event of significant changes.
Stricter monitoring of legacy ICT system risks is needed. ICT systems become 
outdated, because at some point spare parts for the hardware or security updates for 
the software are no longer provided. Any outdated (legacy)  systems that do remain ICT
in operation require special attention, as this lack of security updates increases their 
vulnerability to cyber attacks. It is therefore imperative that the lifecycle of  systems ICT
be monitored and managed. Although this problem was highlighted in the 2021  BAIT
amendment, inspections have often shown that these systems are inadequately 
monitored and managed.  requires that a thorough risk evaluation be conducted DORA
when an  system is integrated and a new assessment be carried out least once a ICT
year.
2.3.6 Protection, prevention and detection
Once critical data and  systems have been identified, protection measures must be ICT
implemented that are present and effective at all stages of the data management 
procedure – storage, transfer and processing. The effectiveness of the implemented  14) 
14 ICT assets refer to “software or hardware [...] in the network and information systems used by the financial 
entity”; see  Article 3(7). DORA

DORA from the perspective of on-site inspections
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 124protective measures must be tested regularly.  The management body is responsible for 
adopting an information security guideline that makes the fundamental protection 
requirements for availability, authenticity, integrity and confidentiality binding. ICT 
security policies, procedures, protocols and tools need to be developed in line with the 
above to specify individual security measures more precisely. For example, network 
segments and devices should be able to be isolated automatically wherever possible in 
the event of a cyber attack and automatic vulnerability scans should be carried out at 
least weekly for ICT systems that support critical or important functions.
In addition to these technical and procedural requirements, the human factor must be 
taken into account and the necessary awareness of  risks raised. A 2022 study by ICT
Gartner, for example, found that more than two-thirds of employees knowingly violate 
security regulations in order to work comfortably.  It is therefore important that 
security measures are integrated into  systems while being as simple and practical ICT
as possible. Tests have repeatedly shown that important security measures were 
missing or not effectively implemented. Protection breaches were not discovered due 
to inadequate vulnerability management and therefore not remedied, making 
institutions more vulnerable to cyber attacks.  requires that protective measures DORA
be reviewed regularly and independently as part of a comprehensive testing 
programme. 15) 
15 See 2022 Gartner Drivers of Secure Behavior Survey, , last accessed on 16 August 2024. gartner.com

DORA from the perspective of on-site inspections
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 125Supplementary information
Threat-led Penetration Testing ( ) TLPT
As soon as  takes effect in January 2025, the previously voluntary  tests now DORA TIBER
referred to as  will become mandatory for certain Threat-led Penetration Testing ( ) TLPT
financial entities in the   will therefore become an instrument of the financial .EUTLPT
supervisory authorities. However, it is not primarily aimed at meeting regulatory 
requirements; through its special learning character, it aims to show entities the 
potential for improving their own resilience to cyber-attacks.
The general requirements concerning the execution of  are defined in the technical TLPT
regulation standard  on ). This standard relies on the  framework  for (RTS TLPT TIBER
guidance, which is widely used in the  and serves as an “execution guideline” for EU
specific procedures involved in individual tests.  short for “Threat Intelligence-, TIBER
Based Ethical Red Teaming”, comprises the simulation of realistic cyber-attacks on 
critical  systems of financial entities by “ethical hackers” (red team testers) based on ICT
threat analyses. This facilitates near-realistic testing of the entity-specific security level. 
In Germany, the Bundesbank’s  competence centre,  Cyber Team TIBER TIBER
Deutschland ), has been supporting the execution of  tests according to ( -TCT DE TIBER
this framework since the year 2020. The experience acquired by the  in five years -TCT DE
is seamlessly integrated into the implementation of  under TLPT . DORA
Various types of financial entities are eligible under  for mandatory execution of DORA
 including credit institutions, insurers and financial market infrastructures. Since , TLPT
 is an advanced tool for reinforcing operational resilience, it calls for a minimum TLPT
measure of maturity when it comes to the level of  security. Only then can the test ICT
be executed effectively and beneficially. Accordingly, not all financial entities mentioned 
are required to carry out  Art. 26(8) of  defines three selection criteria: (1) . TLPT DORA
impact-related factors (impact of the financial entity’s activities on the financial sector), 
(2) financial stability and (3)  risk profile and  maturity. The  on  further ICT ICT RTS TLPT
details these selection criteria and introduces a distinction between quantitative 
institution-related and qualitative risk-related criteria. 1)   2) 
1 See , last accessed: 16 August 2024 eba.europa.eu
2 For further particulars on  please refer to: , TIBER bundesbank.de

DORA from the perspective of on-site inspections
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 126In particular, systemically important credit institutions (G-  and O-  under Art. 131 SIIs SIIs
of Directive 2013/36/ ) fall within the scope of application of the  and are required EU RTS
to carry out  In Germany, this chiefly applies to credit institutions under direct  . TLPT ECB
supervision. The  designates central security depositories  central RTS ( ), CSDs
counterparties  and the largest trading venues (exchanges) in a member state as ( ) CCPs
well as insurance companies, payment institutions and electronic money institutions if 
they meet certain quantitative criteria.
The competent supervisory authority ultimately decides which financial entities meet 
the criteria and notifies them in advance of the tests. The relevant authority for major 
credit institutions is the  and for stock exchanges it is the stock exchange ECB
supervisory authority in the relevant federal state; all other financial entities in 
Germany fall under the competence of  The  requirements are . BaFin TLPT
predominantly relevant for large, systemically important financial entities. Often, these 
financial entities have already carried out a  test in the past and are already in TIBER
contact with the Bundesbank’s .TCT
As has been the case in the past, operational support for the  will continue to be TLPT
provided by the Bundesbank’s  which will act as the first point of contact for the ,TCT
relevant entities and be responsible for ongoing communication during the  In . TLPT
order to ensure that the tests are realistic, they must be carried out in a strictly 
confidential setting and knowledge of the  must be restricted to only a limited TLPT
group of persons at the entity. The  supports the entities with its expertise and TCT
experience gained from other tests to guarantee smooth execution of the  and to TLPT
maximise the learning experience for the entities.
In the future, however, the supervisory authorities at the European and national levels 
will be increasingly involved in the preparation and follow-up work on the  In . TLPT
addition, collaboration with the existing national  in the respective  member TCTs EU
states will be intensified. The supervisory authorities are involved especially in the 
identification, planning and organisation of the tests and in validating the scope 
thereof. On completion of the  the entity tested prepares a final report and a , TLPT
remediation plan; these are sent to the supervisory authorities, which then follow up 
the weaknesses identified.
The specific information gathering and targeting steps of the  are carried out by TLPT
specialised threat intelligence and red teaming service providers. The threat 
intelligence service provider carries out the threat analysis and creates near-reality 
attack scenarios. The red teaming service provider subsequently implements these 
scenarios. The  on  defines minimum criteria for their experience and expertise RTS TLPT
that rely on the requirements of the  framework for guidance, substantiating and TIBER
extending said requirements in some areas. This ensures that  is carried out in TLPT

DORA from the perspective of on-site inspections
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 127conformity with the highest quality standards. While the threat intelligence service 
provider must always be commissioned externally, red teaming can be carried out by 
internal testers under certain conditions; every third  must be carried out by TLPT
external testers at the very least, however. Art. 26(8)  prohibits the use of internal DORA
testers for credit institutions directly supervised by the .ECB

DORA from the perspective of on-site inspections
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 128The timely detection of anomalous activity and behaviour is an essential part of 
proactive defence.  Given the complex and constantly evolving threat landscape, it is 
essential that mechanisms be implemented that allow unusual activities and 
behaviours in  systems and amongst users to be quickly identified and effectively ICT
responded to. It is therefore necessary to continuously collect, securely store and 
carefully analyse all relevant information from  systems. When patterns are ICT
identified that attackers frequently use or that deviate from normal conditions, an 
automated alarm must be triggered and an immediate check for potential  incidents ICT
must be carried out by specialised personnel.
Past  inspections have found that not all necessary information was collected, or BAIT
that collected data were not analysed appropriately or sufficiently quickly. In future, 
 calls for sufficient resources and suitable  tools to be maintained and clear DORA ICT
responsibilities to be defined.
2.3.7 Response and recovery and backups
Comprehensive contingency plans and regular testing of said plans keep 
institutions functioning. Despite comprehensive preventive safeguards and proactive 
strategies to detect  disruptions and cyber attacks, the possibility of an  system ICT ICT
becoming impaired needs to be considered. Effective contingency plans must be 
maintained to sustain critical or important functions in the event of  disruptions or ICT
cyber attacks, limit damages and ensure a swift resumption of normal operations. 
These plans must include immediate containment measures as well as response and 
recovery procedures adapted to all relevant situations, including the necessary 
resources. To this end, effective communication strategies must be established for 
internal and external stakeholders and for authorities. Sufficiently detailed contingency 
plans must have their effectiveness tested on a regular basis; this is an area in which 
supervisors see potential for improvement in the supervised institutions.  sets out DORA
the necessary scenarios in much more detail and makes plan effectiveness tests 
mandatory.
Robust backup and recovery tools are fundamental for financial institutions to 
minimise catastrophic damage.  Given the growing threat posed by 
ransomware – where attackers encrypt both operational data and backups while 
demanding a ransom for decryption – it is critical that entities arm themselves with 
robust backup strategies, coordinated backup cycles, and effective data recovery and 
system repair methods. These measures, some of which were found to be missing 
during supervisory inspections, are crucial in order to reduce business interruptions in 
the event of an attack and to minimise potentially catastrophic data loss and the 
associated damage.  addresses the threat of ransomware by, amongst other DORA

DORA from the perspective of on-site inspections
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 129things, improving protection against attackers by physically and logically separating 
backups from production systems.
2.3.8 Threat intelligence and communication
An active exchange of information on cyber threats and lessons learnt from 
incidents improves security. The ever-changing cyber threat landscape requires 
entities to do more than merely develop and update their  risk management ICT
frameworks. Rather, they must continuously acquire information on vulnerabilities and 
threats in order to strengthen their own resilience. In addition, the risk management 
framework must be regularly evaluated for opportunities for improvement, particularly 
following serious related incidents or when deficits are detected. Where necessary, -ICT
the framework will then need to be adjusted. Past inspections have often shown that 
financial institutions make insufficient use of external threat information and therefore 
do not have an accurate picture of their individual security situations.  now DORA
recommends that institutions actively form networks to exchange information and 
insights relating to cyber threats.
Communication plans and clear responsibilities reduce reputational risks in the 
event of ICT disruptions.   disruptions and cyber attacks can cause considerable ICT
reputational loss in addition to financial damage. In the past, delayed or inconsistent 
communication with the relevant stakeholders has prevented appropriate responses to 
 incidents.  now requires entities to maintain specific communication plans for ICT DORA
all relevant parties, including customers, other financial entities and the general public. 
In addition, responsibility for communication in the event of  incidents must be ICT
clearly defined.

DORA from the perspective of on-site inspections
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 1303 Looking ahead
In this digital age, information and communication technologies are essential for highly 
interconnected and interdependent financial entities. It is therefore vital that the 
associated risks are addressed through digital operational resilience.  represents DORA
a significant milestone in the management of  risks in the financial sector.ICT
Entities benefit from a harmonised risk management approach that takes into account 
the risks arising from  third-party services, thereby supporting the financial sector in ICT
its dealings with  third-party service providers. At the same time, it is essential that ICT
supervised institutions continue to remain aware that implementing and maintaining a 
robust  risk management framework is not solely a matter of meeting regulatory ICT
requirements. Rather, it is in institutions’ own fundamental interest to establish and 
maintain such sound risk management practices.
In the past, German supervisors have always been actively involved in ensuring that 
institutions’  risk management is effective and practice-oriented. In particular, the ICT
findings from inspections and dialogue with financial corporations and  third-party ICT
service providers provide fertile ground for identifying future challenges that may arise 
from  risks and advancing the further development of regulatory requirements in a ICT
practical manner.
DORA  contributes to ensuring the integrity, availability and confidentiality of the 
information and communication systems of supervised financial entities, thereby 
protecting against potential financial losses, reputational risks and other operational 
risks that may result from related threats. However, given the dynamic -ICT
developments caused by digitalisation and the constantly changing threat situation, it 
is foreseeable that future adjustments to regulation will be necessary. European 
legislators therefore plan to review  by 2028 and submit a report on it and, if DORA
required, a legislative proposal.

DORA from the perspective of on-site inspections
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 131List of references
Tremmel, S. (2024), “Vermeidbares Übel – Hergang und Folgen des CrowdStrike-
Vorfalls” in c’t, No 18/2024, p. 14 f.

132EU budget and 
NextGenerationEU off-
budget entity: Member 
States’ financial 
relationships in 2023
Monthly Report – September 2024

EU budget and NextGenerationEU off-budget entity: Member States’ financial 
relationships in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 133Every year, the Bundesbank analyses how the European Union  budget and the ()EU
NextGenerationEU (  off-budget entity impact financially on Member States’ ) NGEU
public finances. This exercise presents each Member State’s net contributions. These 
reveal the extent to which the European budgets represent a burden or a relief for 
Member States in financial terms. Lower-performing Member States are generally net 
recipients, because this is how the  intends to support the economic catching-up EU
process in these countries.
In 2023, the EU budget comprised expenditure of €165 billion, or just under 1% of EU 
gross national income ( ).GNI  As usual, most resources went towards cohesion and 
 agricultural policy. Alongside this were the NGEU grants, which amounted to €66 
 billion, or just under 0.4% of EU .GNI  These also include, for the first time, NGEU grants 
REPowerEU to finance the energy transition in the economy ( ). For this purpose, in the 
wake of the energy crisis, Member States agreed on additional grants of €20 billion, 
funded through the sale of allowances under the EU Emissions Trading System ( ). EU ETS
Ten countries were net contributors to the EU budget and , NGEU  led by the 
Netherlands, Ireland and Germany at just under 0.7% of their respective .GNI  The 
remaining 17 Member States were net recipients. In proportion to ,GNI  Croatia 
received the most resources on balance, at more than 4% of its .GNI
 The joint EU debt for NGEU grants is a burden on the Member States, which have to 
service that debt just as they do their national debt. That is why it is important to 
disclose the European debt, too, in a transparent, detailed and timely manner. It would 
be helpful if the figures were made available at the same time as the data on national 
government finances published in the notifications under the Excessive Deficit 
Procedure ( ).EDP

EU budget and NextGenerationEU off-budget entity: Member States’ financial 
relationships in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 1341 Financial links between Member States, the  EU
budget and the  off-budget entity NGEU
The Bundesbank regularly analyses how European budgets impact on the public 
finances of individual Member States. It does so by providing annual accounts of 
Member States’ net contributions to the EU budget and the NGEU  off-budget entity.
 The size and structure of these two European budgets must be agreed upon through 
mutual consent of the Member States. These decisions are usually complex and their 
financial implications are not always readily apparent.
Net contributions show whether intra-European grants out of European budgets 
represent a financial burden or relief for Member States on balance.  A positive net 
contribution means that a Member State is a net recipient, i.e. it gets more out of the 
European budgets than it pays in. Conversely, a negative net contribution means that 
the Member State is a net contributor. Net contributions can be calculated for  as NGEU
well. As the Member States are financing  initially through joint borrowing, the NGEU
financing burden depends on each Member State’s future share of  debt service. NGEU
The regular EU budget is financed through current contributions by Member States.  
These decide on the amount and allocation of expenditure every seven years in 
negotiations on the multiannual financial framework ( ). The current  runs from MFF MFF
2021 to 2027. The bulk of the expenditure goes to Member States in the form of grants, 
whilst a small share is used to fund joint spending, such as on border protection or 
humanitarian aid, for example.
On the expenditure side, the present article considers only operating payments, and 
only those that go to the EU Member States. One notable exception here is 
administrative expenditure. The  budget also funds grants to countries outside the EU
 for development and humanitarian aid, for example. These payments are likewise EU
not included in the analysis. 1) 
 2) 1 For a detailed explanation of the methodology used here as well as a presentation of the net contributions 
made in 2021, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2022). For a presentation of the net contributions made in 2022, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023).

EU budget and NextGenerationEU off-budget entity: Member States’ financial 
relationships in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 135Countries with lower economic performance (measured in terms of GNI  per 
capita) generally receive disproportionately high grants out of the EU budget.  This 
expenditure profile essentially determines the net contributions to the  budget. This EU
is because the Member States’ contributions to the  budget are roughly proportional EU
to their economic performance.
On the revenue side, this article only factors in current payments by Member States 
into the EU budget.  Customs receipts are another source of revenue for the  EU
budget. These are collected at the ’s external borders, however, which is why they EU
cannot be attributed to the Member States. There are other revenue items as well, such 
as receipts from fines for violating  competition law or fines paid by Member States.EU
Unlike the EU budget, NGEU  is financed initially via joint European debt taken out by 
the European Commission. The off-budget entity supplements the regular  budget EU
for a limited period of six years from 2021 to 2026. Adopted by Member States as a one-
off crisis measure in response to the coronavirus pandemic,  comprises grants NGEU
and loans to  countries. The centrepiece of  is the Recovery and Resilience EU NGEU
Facility ( ). It accounts for all of the loans and around 80% of the grants. The RRF
remaining 20% is covered by instruments within the regular  budget.EU
The joint debt for NGEU  loans must be serviced by the borrowing Member States 
themselves (interest and repayments). This arrangement means that any 
redistribution is limited to the extent to which Member States pay less in interest 
than the market rate on their own debt.
The joint debt for NGEU  grants, on the other hand, is serviced by all Member 
States on a pro rata basis out of the EU budget. Interest has been payable since 
2021, while repayment is scheduled to start in 2028 and end in 2058.
Overall, NGEU  comprises grants and loans totalling €730 billion, which are 
disproportionately disbursed to Member States with below average per capita .GNI
 Grants of up to €420 billion and loans of €390 billion were allocated initially. Member 
States did not draw down the available loan volume in full, requesting only €290 billion.
 In the context of the energy crisis,  grants of around €20 billion were added for RRF
REPowerEU ( ). see the supplementary information on REPowerEU 2) 
 3) 
 4) 
2 GNI was selected as the reference variable for the  budget. It differs from gross domestic product  EU ( ) GDP
with regard to which household income is included.  encompasses the entire income of all residents, GNI
regardless of whether it is generated domestically or abroad.  on the other hand, only incorporates total , GDP
income generated domestically.
3 All  figures are shown in current prices. NGEU
4 In accordance with the  Regulation, Member States were required to request the loans by the end of NGEU
August 2023.

EU budget and NextGenerationEU off-budget entity: Member States’ financial 
relationships in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 136In order to obtain the RRF resources, Member States need to satisfy certain 
requirements.  To this end, they have each agreed national Recovery and Resilience 
Plans ( ) with the European Commission. Member States were normally able to RRPs
draw down up to 13% of the allocated grants in the form of pre-financing. To obtain 
any further resources beyond that, they must demonstrate that they have reached 
their agreed milestones.
To disclose the net contributions resulting from NGEU  grants, it is necessary to 
make assumptions.  The Bundesbank assumes that Member States fund the debt taken 
out for this purpose in proportion with their respective  shares. This is a reasonable GNI
financing key because Member States currently fund additional expenditure out of the 
 budget in accordance with their  shares. And it has been agreed that the  EU GNI NGEU
debt will be serviced out of the  budget. The net contributions calculated in this EU
manner are the same as if the Member States funded  annually via the regular  NGEU EU
budget.

EU budget and NextGenerationEU off-budget entity: Member States’ financial 
relationships in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 137Supplementary information
REPowerEU
In response to the energy crisis, the Member States of the European Union decided, 
based on a proposal by the European Commission and following agreement with 
the European Parliament, to increase the volume of grants available under the 
Recovery and Resilience Facility ( )RRF  The additional funds range from  by €20 billion.
0.02% of gross national income ( )GNI  in Ireland to 0.5% of GNI in Bulgaria (see Chart 
5.1). Member States can use the funds they are granted to ensure access to clean and 
affordable energy. To this end, they must amend their existing RRF plans to include a 
dedicated REPowerEU chapter, which must then be approved by the European 
Commission.

EU budget and NextGenerationEU off-budget entity: Member States’ financial 
relationships in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 138Member States will finance the additional RRF grants of around €20 billion through 
the sale of allowances under the EU Emissions Trading System ( ). EU ETS For this, the  
Member States have reallocated €12 billion in funds that would otherwise have been 
available to the EU’s Innovation Fund. The Innovation Fund promotes investment in low-
emissions technologies in the period from 2020 to 2030. Its funds stem from the 
auctioning of ETS allowances that Member States had waived in favour of the 
Innovation Fund. The remaining €8 billion for REPowerEU will be generated from the 
sale of additional ETS allowances that would normally only have been available for 
auction from 2027 onwards. For this period, Member States will therefore have fewer 
allowances for auction and will generate correspondingly lower revenues. The early 
sale of these allowances may have contributed to the decline in their prices since their 
peak in 2023.
For simplicity, Member States’ contributions are again equated with their GNI 
This does not take into account how the shares when calculating net contributions. 


EU budget and NextGenerationEU off-budget entity: Member States’ financial 
relationships in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 139ETS auction rights and thus revenues are actually distributed across the individual 
countries. The contribution key depends, amongst other things, on the historical 
distribution of the emissions covered by the scheme when the ETS was first established. 
It also favours lower-income Member States in some cases. Since the start of European 
emissions trading, it has been adjusted several times.

EU budget and NextGenerationEU off-budget entity: Member States’ financial 
relationships in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 1402 Cash flows and net contributions in 2023
The EU budget for 2023 comprised expenditure of around €165 billion, which was €3 
billion less than in the previous year. This equated to just under 1% of   Just EU .GNI
over €11 billion of that figure went towards administrative expenditure. That is just 
under 7% of total expenditure. Expenditure on servicing  debt came to €700 NGEU
million.
Operating expenditure stood at €153 billion (net of administrative expenditure and 
NGEU  debt service).  As in the previous years, just over one-third of this amount was 
spent each on cohesion policy and agricultural policy (see Chart 5.2).  The remaining 
amount of nearly €40 billion was distributed across the areas of research and 
infrastructure, external action, and security and Union citizenship. Just under €20 billion 
of the operating expenditure went to recipients outside the  mainly in the field of ,EU
external action. 5) 
5 For an overview of the net contributions only from the perspective of cohesion and agricultural policy, see 
Busch et al. (2024).

EU budget and NextGenerationEU off-budget entity: Member States’ financial 
relationships in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 141The amounts of spending that went to Member States differed significantly across 
countries again in 2023  (see Chart 5.3). In relation to their respective  Croatia and ,GNI
Latvia received the most resources, at more than 3½%, while the Netherlands, 
Germany, Sweden, Denmark and Austria received the least, at less than ½% of their .GNI


EU budget and NextGenerationEU off-budget entity: Member States’ financial 
relationships in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 142Member States’ payments into the EU budget came to roughly €130 billion in 2023.  
On (unweighted) average, Member States paid just over 0.8% of their respective  GNI
into the  budget (see Chart 5.4).  Luxembourg was an outlier to the upside, at 1.3% EU
of its  after it had to make substantial backpayments of  and  own ,GNI GNI VAT
resources for previous years because the assessment bases had been revised. 
Disregarding this outlier, however, the gap between the countries with the lowest and 
highest payments was only just under 0.4 percentage point. It was therefore roughly 
on a par with other years. At €20 billion, customs revenue was down by nearly €4 billion 
on the previous year. That decline can be explained, at least in part, by reductions in 
tariffs.  However, it also represents a correction of the previous year’s especially high 
 6) 
 7) 
6 Figures based on  budget data that the European Commission publishes on its website. See EU  spending EU
. Current  data were used for and revenue 2021‑2027 Eurostat .GNI
7 See . Annual statistical accounts of the  institutions and bodies subsectorEU

EU budget and NextGenerationEU off-budget entity: Member States’ financial 
relationships in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 143customs receipts. In 2022, imports from third countries were particularly high in terms 
of value, not least because Member States substituted cheap Russian gas and oil after 
their import was banned by the .EU
In 2023, disbursed NGEU  grants totalled €66 billion, or just under 0.4% of EU ,GNI  
with €48 billion of that figure attributable to the RRF (see Chart 5.5). In relation to 
their respective  Croatia, Portugal and Greece received the most  resources, ,GNI NGEU
at more than 1.5%, while Ireland, the Netherlands, Belgium, Sweden and Finland each 
received less than 0.1%. The differences are also due to the fact that the allocated  RRF
grants are paid out at different speeds.


EU budget and NextGenerationEU off-budget entity: Member States’ financial 
relationships in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 144Of the allocated resources, 13% were disbursed as RRF grants in 2023, like in the 
two previous years. Again, there were significant differences across countries. While 
nine countries received no  grants at all, Estonia, France and Lithuania each RRF
obtained more than one-quarter of the total resources allocated to them. Eleven 
countries received grants for the REPowerEU chapter for the first time: Austria, Czechia, 
Denmark, Estonia, France, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia and Slovenia.
At the half-way point of the programme, significantly less than half of the available 
RRF resources have been disbursed  (see Chart 5.6). By the end of 2023, the Member 
States had, in total, requested just 40% of the  resources. Outflows will need to pick RRF
up pace to prevent the resources from expiring, because the European Commission is 
only allowed to disburse them up until the end of 2026. This holds particularly true for 
countries that had requested no or very little  resources by the end of 2023 (Ireland, RRF
the Netherlands, Sweden, Hungary and Poland) or only the pre-financing (Belgium and 
Finland). Germany, meanwhile, had drawn down 21% of the allocated resources by the 


EU budget and NextGenerationEU off-budget entity: Member States’ financial 
relationships in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 145end of 2023; this does not yet include any funds for REPowerEU. Only Croatia, France 
and Italy had requested more than half of the resources allocated to them by the half-
way point of the programme.
Looking at the EU budget and NGEU  as a whole, ten countries were net contributors 
in 2023  (see Chart 5.7). Net payments were highest in the Netherlands, Ireland and 
Germany, at just under 0.7% of  Besides these countries, Finland, Sweden, .GNI
Denmark, Luxembourg, Austria, France and Belgium were net contributors. With the 
exception of France and Belgium, these countries made net contributions to both the 
 budget and  By contrast, France was a net recipient of  resources and EU . NGEU NGEU
Belgium was a net recipient of resources from the  budget.EU


EU budget and NextGenerationEU off-budget entity: Member States’ financial 
relationships in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 146The remaining 17 countries were net recipients from both budgets.  Of these 
countries, Croatia received the highest net grants, at over 4% of  followed by ,GNI
Greece, Slovakia and Lithuania, at more than 3%. These countries were net recipients of 
resources from both the  budget and  as were Latvia, Estonia, Romania, EU , NGEU
Portugal, Czechia, Slovenia, Malta and Spain. By contrast, Hungary, Bulgaria, Poland 
and Cyprus were net recipients only from the  budget, but were net contributors to EU
 As in the previous two years, Italy was the only Member State to rank among the . NGEU
net recipient countries only on account of . NGEU


EU budget and NextGenerationEU off-budget entity: Member States’ financial 
relationships in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 1473  debt and national debt NGEU
The EU budget has a direct impact on the revenue and expenditure sides of Member 
States’ public finances. NGEU  grants, meanwhile, currently affect only the revenue 
 This is because, all other things being equal, the side. NGEU  grants received by a 
country reduce its deficit. At the same time, a deficit is accrued at the European level. 
The debt taken out for this deficit is recorded at the European level and increases debt 
there.
Member States are ultimately burdened with the European debt just as they are 
 That is why this debt has to be taken into account when with their national debt.
analysing national public finances. It was for this reason that the Bundesbank reported 
the European debt attributable to Germany together with the German Maastricht debt 
level in 2023.
To make the total debt burden visible, it is important for the European debt to also 
 It is to be welcomed that be disclosed in a transparent, detailed and timely manner.
Eurostat  published granular data on European debt for the first time in December last 
year. At first, however, data were only available for 2021 and 2022, which is why the 
Bundesbank estimated European debt for 2023 so that it could be counted towards 
Germany’s Maastricht debt level.  In July, Eurostat  published the figures for 2023 ( see 
the supplementary information on the Maastricht debt of EU institutions in 2023 ). It 
would be helpful going forward if these figures were made available together with the 
Maastricht data for national public finances in the spring. 8) 
 9) 
8 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2024a).
9 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2024b).

EU budget and NextGenerationEU off-budget entity: Member States’ financial 
relationships in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 148Supplementary information
The Maastricht debt of the  institutions in 2023EU
According to current information provided by , Eurostat  EU debt after consolidation 
against claims on Member States stood at €169 billion at the end of 2023, or just 
under 1% of EU gross national income ( )GNI  (see Chart 5.8). This was €71 billion  
lower than estimated by the Bundesbank in April 2024  and can be attributed to two 
changes. First, Eurostat  now includes the Single Resolution Fund ( )SRF  as an additional 
entity among the EU institutions.  The SRF appears to be investing large amounts of 
reserves in bonds issued by EU Member States. Second, Eurostat  now also takes into 
account the deposits that the European Commission holds with the Member States. In 
both cases, these are claims of EU entities against Member States, which reduce 
consolidated EU debt. These changes also bring down consolidated EU debt in 2021 by 
€27 billion and in 2022 by €38 billion as compared with the first Eurostat  publication in 
December 2023. 1) 
 2) 
 3) 
1 See Annual statistical accounts of the  institutions and bodies subsector.EU
2 For more information on this and the methodology used for European debt allocation, see Deutsche 
Bundesbank (2024b).
3 For the sake of simplicity, the term “  institutions” is used here to refer to “  institutions and bodies” as EU EU
defined in the European System of National Accounts ( ).ESA

EU budget and NextGenerationEU off-budget entity: Member States’ financial 
relationships in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 149Compared with the previous year, consolidated EU   debt rose by €59 billion in 2023.
Borrowing for NGEU  grants increased debt by €63 billion. In addition, there were 
additional joint European loans to Ukraine totalling €18 billion (macro-financial 
assistance). Meanwhile, claims by the EU institutions on the Member States rose by €22 
billion. Taken in isolation, this reduced consolidated EU debt.  The main reason for this 
increase is likely to have been that the European Stability Mechanism ( ) ESM  reduced its 
liquid assets and invested in bonds issued by the Member States.
 4) 
4 Only claims that have no corresponding liabilities are relevant here. These include mainly the bonds held by 
the  and the  as well as the deposits that the European Commission holds directly with the Member States. ESM SRF

EU budget and NextGenerationEU off-budget entity: Member States’ financial 
relationships in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 150List of references
Busch B., B. Kauder and S. Sultan (2024), The EU and money: Who pays, and who gets?, 
-IWReport, 34/2024.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024a), German general government debt up in 2023 by €62 
billion to €2.62 trillion, debt ratio down from 66.1% to 63.7%, press release of 28 March 
2024
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024b), The Maastricht debt of the EU institutions and its fiscal 
implications for Germany, Commentaries, Monthly Report, April 2024.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023), Member States’ financial relationships with the EU 
budget and the NextGenerationEU off-budget entity in 2022, Monthly Report, October 
2023, pp. 79‑86.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022), Member States’ financial relationships with the EU 
budget and the Next Generation EU off-budget entity in 2021, Monthly Report, October 
2022, pp. 35‑46.
European Commission (2024), European Commission, Directorate-General for Budget, 
Consolidated annual accounts of the European Union: Integrated financial and 
accountability reporting 2023, Publications Office of the European Union, p. 141.

EU budget and NextGenerationEU off-budget entity: Member States’ financial 
relationships in 2023
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – September 2024 151

Statistical  
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
024 
1•  2 September

Contents
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5•
2. External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5•
3. General economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8•
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10•
3. Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16•
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche 
Bundes  bank) in Germany  .............................................................................................  20•
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24•
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26•
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28•
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30•
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32•
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34•
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36•
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36•
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38•
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38•
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39•
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
2• 024   2 September

V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42•
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42•
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest  ....................................................................  43•
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43•
3. Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43•
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48•
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49•
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50•
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51•
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52•
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52•
5. Yields on German securities  .........................................................................................  53•
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53•
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54•
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55•
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56•
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57•
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  .. 58•
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  ........................................................................................................  58•
3. General government: budgetary development  .............................................................  59•
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59•
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60•
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
024 
3• 2 September

7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61•
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ....... 61•
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62•
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62•
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63•
12. Maastricht debt by creditor  .........................................................................................  63•
13. Maastricht debt by instrument .....................................................................................  64•
14. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category  ............................  65•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  66•
2. Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  67•
3. Orders received by industry  .........................................................................................  68•
4. Orders received by construction  ..................................................................................  69•
5. Retail trade turnover  ....................................................................................................  69•
6. Labour market  .............................................................................................................  70•
7. Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  71•
8. Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  72•
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  72•
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  73•
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  74•
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  75•
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  76•
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  77•
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ................................  78•
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............  78•
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  79•
7. External position of the Bundesbank ............................................................................  80•
8. External positions of enterprises  ..................................................................................  81•
9. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  82•
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage of 
Economic   and Monetary Union  ...................................................................................  82•
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  83•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
4• 024    2 September

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
5•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
M3 3
M1 M23-month
moving average
(centred)MFI lending,
totalMFI lending to
enterprises
and
householdsMonetary
capital
formation  4 €STR  5,6Yield on Euro-
pean govern-
ment bonds
outstanding  7
Period Annual percentage change % p.a. as a monthly average
2022 Dec. 0.2 3.4 3.8 3.8 3.9 4.4 0.7 1.57 2.8
2023 Jan. – 1.3 2.5 3.0 3.1 3.0 3.7 1.4 1.90 2.9
Feb. – 3.1 1.7 2.5 2.5 2.6 3.3 1.9 2.28 3.0
Mar. – 4.7 1.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.9 2.4 2.57 3.1
Apr. – 5.7 0.5 1.4 1.5 1.4 2.4 2.4 2.90 3.0
May – 7.0 – 0.1 0.9 0.9 0.9 2.3 3.2 3.08 3.0
June – 8.0 – 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.4 1.6 3.5 3.24 3.0
July – 9.1 – 1.4 – 0.4 – 0.4 0.1 1.3 3.9 3.40 3.1
Aug. – 10.4 – 2.4 – 1.3 – 0.9 – 0.1 0.7 4.4 3.64 3.2
Sep. – 9.9 – 2.2 – 1.2 – 1.2 – 0.4 0.4 4.7 3.75 3.3
Oct. – 10.0 – 2.2 – 1.0 – 1.0 – 0.5 0.4 5.3 3.90 3.5
Nov. – 9.5 – 1.9 – 0.9 – 0.6 – 0.7 0.2 5.1 3.90 3.3
Dec. – 8.5 – 0.9 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.4 0.4 4.7 3.90 2.7
2024 Jan. – 8.6 – 1.1 0.1 0.2 – 0.4 0.4 5.2 3.90 2.8
Feb. – 7.7 – 0.6 0.4 0.5 – 0.3 0.8 5.1 3.91 2.9
Mar. – 6.6 – 0.2 0.9 0.9 – 0.2 0.8 5.2 3.91 2.9
Apr. – 5.9 0.1 1.3 1.2 0.0 0.8 5.0 3.91 3.0
May – 5.0 0.6 1.5 1.7 – 0.1 0.5 4.7 3.91 3.0
June – 3.4 1.3 2.3 2.0 0.2 0.9 4.6 3.75 3.1
July – 3.1 1.2 2.3 ... 0.3 0.8 4.2 3.66 3.0
Aug. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3.66 2.8
1 Source: ECB.  2 Seasonally adjusted.  3 Excluding money market fund shares/units,
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by
non-euro area residents.  4 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs.  5 EuroShort-Term Rate.  6 See also footnotes to Table VI.3, p. 43●. 7 GDP-weighted yield on
ten-year government bonds. Countries included: DE, FR, NL, BE, AT, FI, IE, PT, ES, IT,
GR, SK, CY, SI.
2. External transactions and positions *
Selected items of the euro area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate  3
Balanceof which:
Goods BalanceDirect
investmentPortfolio
investmentFinancial
derivatives  2Other
investmentReserve
assetsReference
rate 
vis-á-vis the
US dollar Nominal Real  4
Period € million EUR 1 = USD ... Q1 1999 = 100
2022 Dec. +30,757 + 9,240 +63,792 +79,964 +52,268 –16,673 –56,575 + 4,808 1.0589 96.8 92.6
2023 Jan. –16,127 –14,473 + 1,049 –14,373 +22,276 – 5,068 + 6,861 – 8,646 1.0769 97.1 92.8
Feb. +14,206 +20,610 –10,152 +34,568 –39,111 + 8,732 – 2,988 –11,354 1.0715 97.0 93.1
Mar. +30,270 +38,987 +68,146 + 9,148 –92,070 – 3,321 +152,937 + 1,453 1.0706 97.3 93.2
Apr. + 8,277 + 7,348 – 6,231 –29,333 +67,239 – 1,507 –40,769 – 1,863 1.0968 98.4 94.2
May –10,717 +15,447 –18,078 –58,134 +43,581 + 7,018 –11,903 + 1,360 1.0868 98.0 93.6
June +32,406 +32,585 +75,618 +82,370 –42,091 –10,329 +43,283 + 2,385 1.0840 98.2 93.8
July +25,549 +21,945 +39,707 –29,594 +51,761 – 8,097 +25,239 + 398 1.1058 99.2 94.9
Aug. +25,057 +21,746 +10,921 + 1,863 – 6,851 + 3,823 +10,784 + 1,301 1.0909 99.0 95.0
Sep. +32,885 +28,144 +43,576 +17,411 –57,369 + 3,176 +84,232 – 3,874 1.0684 98.5 94.6
Oct. +14,816 +14,159 +44,847 + 3,358 –12,005 +17,054 +32,902 + 3,538 1.0563 98.0 94.1
Nov. +32,629 +33,319 +28,445 + 1,836 +19,914 + 1,072 + 4,246 + 1,376 1.0808 98.7 94.6
Dec. +40,473 +28,842 +47,040 –13,043 –48,162 + 4,853 +101,916 + 1,476 1.0903 98.2 93.9
2024 Jan. +26,745 +26,779 +39,945 + 9,663 –19,839 +11,982 +37,318 + 821 1.0905 98.4 94.4
Feb. +35,523 +36,897 +14,865 +49,381 –13,543 +11,358 –33,197 + 866 1.0795 98.1 94.1
Mar. +43,103 +38,121 +57,195 + 9,244 +17,800 –11,891 +42,574 – 532 1.0872 98.8 94.8
Apr. +32,676 +32,363 +13,276 +32,599 –22,184 + 6,592 – 4,538 + 806 1.0728 98.6 p 94.5
May +10,349 +33,383 +30,355 +18,015 – 146 – 2,759 +13,606 + 1,639 1.0812 98.9 p 94.8
June +52,366 +39,772 +86,628 +31,207 –43,578 – 1,502 +99,194 + 1,306 1.0759 98.5 p 94.5
July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0844 99.0 p 95.1
Aug. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1012 99.0 p 94.9
see also Tables XII. 9 and 11, pp. 82●/ 83●.  2 Including employee stock options.
3 Bundesbank calculation. Vis-á-vis the currencies of the extended EER group oftranding partners (fixed composition).  4 Based on consumer price indices.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
6•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
3. General economic indicators
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Croatia Latvia
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
2021 6.2 6.9 3.7 7.1 2.8 6.9 8.4 16.2 8.3 13.0 6.7
2022 3.3 3.0 1.4 0.1 1.3 2.6 5.6 8.6 4.0 7.0 3.0
2023 0.4 1.4 –0.3 –3.0 –1.2 0.9 2.0 –5.5 0.9 3.1 –0.3
2023 Q1 1.3 1.7 0.6 –5.1 0.2 1.4 2.1 –0.2 2.5 2.9 0.7
Q2 0.5 1.3 –0.4 –2.4 –1.0 0.8 3.0 –3.9 0.3 3.8 –0.6
Q3 0.0 1.3 –0.7 –2.8 –2.1 0.5 1.9 –8.4 0.4 1.4 –0.6
Q4 0.2 1.2 –0.4 –1.9 –1.6 1.0 1.1 –9.1 0.5 4.4 –0.5
2024 Q1 0.5 1.3 –0.8 –2.2 –1.5 1.4 1.6 –4.7 0.6 3.9 0.1
Q2 0.6 1.2 0.3 –1.0 –0.9 0.5 2.7 –4.0 1.2 3.3 0.5
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
2021 8.8 16.8 4.6 12.8 4.3 5.5 10.4 28.3 12.3 6.3 6.6
2022 2.3 –0.7 –0.3 –2.3 4.0 –0.0 2.5 18.9 0.3 1.6 0.8
2023 –2.2 –5.4 –1.9 –8.8 –2.4 0.7 2.3 –7.2 –2.1 –0.1 –4.5
2023 Q1 0.8 –2.9 0.9 –7.9 0.3 –0.9 2.3 7.8 –0.7 –1.7 –4.2
Q2 –0.9 –4.3 –0.4 –12.9 –3.8 1.3 1.2 4.2 –3.5 0.1 –7.4
Q3 –4.9 –6.9 –3.5 –9.8 –2.8 0.5 –0.2 –21.6 –2.5 –0.4 –6.0
Q4 –3.9 –7.4 –4.5 –4.3 –3.2 1.8 6.0 –12.8 –1.5 1.6 –0.1
2024 Q1 –4.7 –7.1 –5.6 –7.0 –3.1 0.3 3.6 –19.4 –3.5 –4.0 –0.3
Q2 –3.6 –4.8 p–4.9 –3.1 –3.1 –1.1 9.7 –11.4 –3.0 –4.6 –4.6
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
2021 81.5 80.1 84.9 78.1 81.2 81.1 75.6 78.0 77.1 75.0 75.3
2022 82.2 79.0 85.2 71.7 81.0 81.8 75.9 79.8 78.9 77.0 75.0
2023 80.7 75.7 83.4 67.3 76.6 81.2 75.2 ... 77.5 77.2 72.9
2023 Q2 81.3 77.2 84.2 70.7 76.4 82.0 73.7 ... 78.0 78.2 73.7
Q3 80.2 75.0 82.9 62.6 77.4 80.6 76.3 ... 77.4 78.4 72.7
Q4 79.6 73.9 81.9 64.6 73.6 81.3 75.9 ... 76.5 74.7 72.3
2024 Q1 79.2 74.0 81.3 65.6 73.3 80.9 73.4 ... 75.5 75.9 71.4
Q2 78.9 74.4 80.2 65.8 74.6 80.7 81.1 ... 76.0 74.2 73.0
Q3 77.7 74.4 77.4 64.9 76.4 81.6 78.2 ... 75.5 73.8 72.1
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
2021 7.8 e 6.3 3.6 e 6.2 e 7.7 e 7.9 e 14.8 e 6.3 e 9.5 e 7.5 e 7.6
2022 6.7 e 5.5 p 3.1 e 5.6 e 6.8 e 7.3 e 12.5 e 4.5 e 8.1 e 6.7 e 6.9
2023 6.6 e 5.5 p 3.0 e 6.4 e 7.2 e 7.3 e 11.1 e 4.3 e 7.7 e 6.1 e 6.5
2024 Feb. 6.5 5.7 3.3 7.5 7.7 7.5 11.4 4.1 7.3 5.3 6.9
Mar. 6.5 5.7 3.3 7.6 8.5 7.4 10.5 4.2 7.0 5.2 6.9
Apr. 6.5 5.6 3.4 7.5 8.3 7.4 10.5 4.3 6.8 5.1 7.0
May 6.5 5.6 3.4 7.4 8.2 7.5 10.3 4.4 6.8 5.1 7.0
June 6.5 5.5 3.4 7.3 8.4 7.5 9.5 4.5 6.9 5.0 6.9
July 6.4 5.4 3.4 7.5 8.5 7.5 9.9 4.7 6.5 5.0 6.9
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2021 2.6 3.2 5 3.2 4.5 2.1 2.1 0.6 2.4 1.9 2.7 3.2
2022 8.4 10.3 8.7 19.4 7.2 5.9 9.3 8.1 8.7 10.7 17.2
2023 6 5.4 2.3 6.0 9.1 4.3 5.7 4.2 5.2 5.9 8.4 9.1
2024 Mar. 2.4 3.8 2.3 4.1 0.6 2.4 3.4 1.7 1.2 4.9 1.0
Apr. 2.4 4.9 2.4 3.1 0.6 2.4 3.2 1.6 0.9 4.7 1.1
May 2.6 4.9 2.8 3.1 0.4 2.6 2.4 2.0 0.8 4.3 0.0
June 2.5 5.4 2.5 2.8 0.5 2.5 2.5 1.5 0.9 3.5 1.5
July 2.6 5.4 2.6 3.5 0.5 2.7 3.0 1.5 1.6 3.3 0.8
Aug. 2.2 4.3 2.0 3.4 1.1 2.2 3.2 1.1 1.2 3.0 0.9
General government financial balance 7
As a percentage of GDP
2021 –5.2 –5.4 –3.6 –2.5 –2.8 –6.6 –7.0 –1.5 –8.7 –2.5 –7.2
2022 –3.6 –3.6 –2.5 –1.0 –0.4 –4.8 –2.5 1.7 –8.6 0.1 –4.6
2023 –3.6 –4.4 –2.4 –3.4 –2.7 –5.5 –1.6 1.7 –7.4 –0.7 –2.2
General government debt 7
As a percentage of GDP
2021 94.6 107.9 69.0 17.8 72.6 113.0 195.0 54.4 147.1 77.5 44.4
2022 90.5 104.3 66.1 18.5 73.5 111.9 172.7 44.4 140.5 67.8 41.8
2023 88.2 105.2 63.6 19.6 75.8 110.6 161.9 43.7 137.3 63.0 43.6
Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, European Central Bank, Federal Statistical
Office, Bundesbank calculations. Latest data are partly based on press reports and areprovisional.  1 Euro area: quarterly data seasonally and calendar adjusted.  2 Manu-
facturing, mining and energy: adjusted for working-day variations.  3 Manufacturing:

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
7•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
6.3 7.2 13.5 6.3 4.2 5.7 4.8 8.4 6.4 9.9 2021
2.4 1.4 4.1 5.0 4.8 6.8 1.9 2.7 5.8 5.1 2022
–0.3 –1.1 7.5 0.1 –0.8 2.3 1.6 2.1 2.5 2.5 2023
–2.4 –1.3 7.4 1.9 2.2 2.7 0.2 1.1 4.5 3.0 2023 Q1
0.8 –0.4 6.9 –0.3 –1.7 2.1 1.8 1.7 2.1 2.2 Q2
0.3 –1.9 8.9 –0.7 –2.0 2.0 2.0 1.3 1.5 2.6 Q3
–0.2 –0.8 6.7 –0.5 –1.5 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.0 2.1 Q4
3.0 –0.2 7.6 –0.6 –1.0 1.5 2.7 2.1 2.5 3.5 2024 Q1
1.8 0.4 4.4 0.8 –0.6 1.6 1.9 0.7 3.3 3.6 Q2
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
20.1 8.4 –0.9 4.0 11.2 3.9 10.6 9.9 7.8 6.0 2021
9.3 –1.3 1.5 2.6 5.7 0.6 –4.4 2.0 3.0 2.6 2022
–5.2 –5.7 7.3 –0.0 –0.3 –3.1 4.5 –4.9 –1.1 2.2 2023
–11.7 –4.4 15.9 3.1 2.0 1.4 2.9 –3.4 0.2 0.3 2023 Q1
0.1 –6.9 7.8 –0.6 0.2 –5.2 3.3 –3.4 –2.1 1.3 Q2
–5.5 –7.7 2.1 –0.7 –0.9 –4.9 3.4 –8.9 –1.8 2.8 Q3
–3.2 –3.8 4.4 –1.8 –2.3 –3.5 8.3 –4.1 –0.9 4.0 Q4
–0.8 –4.3 –2.4 –2.5 –4.8 1.2 –4.5 –3.1 1.3 4.2 2024 Q1
0.2 –2.3 3.9 –2.3 –4.3 1.1 –0.9 –3.0 0.1 6.2 Q2
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
76.7 82.0 76.8 82.4 87.1 79.1 82.2 84.5 77.8 51.3 2021
77.8 80.7 64.7 83.7 87.7 81.9 83.3 84.9 78.7 58.2 2022
68.4 73.1 68.1 81.9 85.3 81.7 82.1 83.1 76.9 61.7 2023
69.2 75.5 53.3 82.5 86.2 83.5 84.0 83.9 76.3 60.9 2023 Q2
68.0 72.0 69.4 81.3 84.7 80.9 83.0 82.8 76.2 63.0 Q3
68.5 70.5 84.1 80.9 83.3 80.9 81.0 82.4 77.8 63.2 Q4
70.6 74.8 75.6 78.8 84.0 81.0 80.1 80.6 77.2 65.1 2024 Q1
70.3 75.3 76.4 79.6 83.3 81.2 77.6 80.8 77.7 63.5 Q2
71.5 76.0 81.4 77.7 81.7 81.3 81.3 81.6 77.9 63.0 Q3
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
e 7.2 e 5.4 e 3.8 e 4.2 e 6.2 e 6.8 e 6.9 e 4.8 e 15.0 e 7.5 2021
e 5.9 e 4.6 e 3.5 e 3.6 e 4.8 e 6.2 e 6.2 e 4.0 e 13.0 e 6.3 2022
e 6.9 e 5.3 e 3.1 e 3.5 e 5.1 e 6.5 e 5.9 e 3.7 e 12.2 e 5.9 2023
7.5 5.7 3.0 3.7 4.7 6.6 5.5 3.3 11.8 5.3 2024 Feb.
7.5 5.7 3.1 3.6 5.0 6.5 5.5 3.4 11.7 5.2 Mar.
7.5 5.7 3.1 3.7 5.0 6.4 5.4 3.5 11.6 5.0 Apr.
7.4 5.8 3.2 3.6 5.1 6.4 5.4 3.5 11.6 4.8 May
7.2 5.8 3.1 3.6 5.2 6.4 5.3 3.5 11.5 5.1 June
8.0 5.8 3.0 3.6 5.0 6.2 5.3 3.3 11.5 5.4 July
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
4.6 3.5 0.7 2.8 2.8 0.9 2.8 2.0 3.0 2.3 2021
18.9 8.2 6.1 11.6 8.6 8.1 12.1 9.3 8.3 8.1 2022
8.7 2.9 5.6 4.1 7.7 5.3 11.0 7.2 3.4 3.9 2023
0.4 3.2 2.7 3.1 4.1 2.6 2.7 3.4 3.3 1.6 2024 Mar.
0.4 3.0 2.4 2.6 3.4 2.3 2.4 3.0 3.4 2.1 Apr.
0.9 3.2 2.3 2.7 3.3 3.8 2.6 2.5 3.8 3.0 May
1.0 2.8 2.2 3.4 3.1 3.1 2.4 1.6 3.6 3.0 June
1.1 2.7 2.3 3.5 2.9 2.7 3.0 1.4 2.9 2.4 July
0.8 1.7 2.4 3.3 2.4 1.8 3.2 1.1 2.4 2.2 Aug.
General government financial balance 7
As a percentage of GDP
–1.1 0.5 –7.6 –2.2 –5.8 –2.9 –5.2 –4.6 –6.7 –1.8 2021
–0.6 –0.3 –5.5 –0.1 –3.3 –0.3 –1.7 –3.0 –4.7 2.7 2022
–0.8 –1.3 –4.9 –0.3 –2.7 1.2 –4.9 –2.5 –3.6 3.1 2023
General government debt 7
As a percentage of GDP
43.4 24.5 53.9 51.7 82.5 124.5 61.1 74.4 116.8 99.3 2021
38.1 24.7 51.6 50.1 78.4 112.4 57.7 72.5 111.6 85.6 2022
38.3 25.7 50.4 46.5 77.8 99.1 56.0 69.2 107.7 77.3 2023
quarterly data seasonally adjusted. Data collection at the beginning of the quarter.
4 Monthly data seasonally adjusted.  5 Influenced by a temporary reduction of valueadded tax between July and December 2020.  6 Including Croatia from 2023 onwards.
7 According to Maastricht Treaty definition.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
8•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts *
a) Euro area 1
€ billion
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2022 Dec. –121.0 –87.8 –0.4 –33.1 –41.3 2.5 –254.6 –257.1 48.9 11.0 0.1 –1.3 39.2
2023 Jan. – 9.8 –0.4 –15.9 –9.5 –4.1 12.5 127.9 115.4 29.5 –6.4 2.2 58.8 –25.1
Feb. 8.0 –12.9 3.3 20.8 29.8 6.8 –1.4 –8.2 13.6 –1.1 1.6 8.4 4.7
Mar. 29.8 37.1 11.7 –7.2 –9.7 74.5 111.8 37.3 28.5 10.3 1.3 6.4 10.6
Apr. – 5.6 27.9 29.5 –33.5 –29.2 –21.2 –21.7 –0.5 10.9 9.4 1.4 4.3 –4.2
May – 0.2 45.5 33.2 –45.7 –50.0 4.4 22.2 17.8 32.3 –0.5 2.4 27.5 2.8
June 5.2 –9.2 –12.3 14.3 21.1 109.5 13.5 –96.1 43.0 1.2 2.8 26.2 12.8
July –45.6 6.9 5.2 –52.5 –52.1 37.0 109.0 72.0 29.6 0.9 2.9 19.4 6.4
Aug. –56.2 –66.9 –12.2 10.8 13.5 31.4 61.8 30.4 21.2 –2.4 4.0 9.6 9.9
Sep. 37.0 33.5 –1.6 3.5 2.6 62.7 –106.7 –169.4 42.0 15.3 5.0 9.9 11.9
Oct. –33.7 6.0 –10.4 –39.8 –39.3 54.6 49.4 –5.2 24.6 –9.3 4.7 27.1 2.2
Nov. 38.1 46.9 –1.1 –8.8 –4.7 59.0 51.3 –7.7 19.1 –4.7 5.6 24.5 –6.3
Dec. –57.9 –47.2 2.7 –10.7 –19.6 26.4 –100.1 –126.5 28.4 12.5 5.9 7.4 2.5
2024 Jan. – 8.7 –1.6 25.7 –7.1 –6.9 118.0 111.8 –6.2 65.6 –3.6 7.0 60.8 1.4
Feb. 38.7 38.2 6.8 0.5 11.0 –15.9 98.2 114.1 5.1 0.8 4.8 14.7 –15.2
Mar. 55.5 47.9 4.0 7.5 7.8 63.6 96.0 32.5 40.4 5.0 3.0 35.2 –2.8
Apr. 32.4 23.7 1.0 8.8 4.7 47.0 8.8 –38.2 0.3 –7.4 2.5 18.6 –13.5
May –24.3 –6.5 –1.2 –17.8 –15.0 43.5 73.5 30.0 9.4 2.3 1.7 –0.5 5.8
June 72.4 55.7 –4.5 16.7 13.8 55.1 –23.6 –78.8 39.9 3.7 1.1 3.9 31.1
July –32.4 0.9 –19.1 –33.3 –28.1 69.4 57.5 –11.9 2.5 –8.5 1.1 4.7 5.3
b) German contribution
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2022 Dec. –28.8 –19.6 –2.4 –9.3 –8.2 –37.1 –71.9 –34.8 –0.5 –3.7 0.4 –1.9 4.8
2023 Jan. 27.5 16.9 –0.2 10.7 8.9 63.0 29.8 –33.3 –14.3 2.7 1.0 3.1 –21.0
Feb. 9.2 8.3 –0.2 0.9 1.8 58.4 –2.0 –60.3 3.3 0.6 1.2 –2.1 3.5
Mar. 4.8 8.1 6.4 –3.4 –3.7 –12.4 10.5 23.0 15.5 6.0 1.6 4.4 3.5
Apr. – 3.7 13.0 1.2 –16.7 –20.2 62.7 –15.2 –77.9 5.0 2.0 1.5 –3.0 4.5
May 5.0 11.3 –1.3 –6.3 –4.7 9.6 16.5 6.9 16.9 2.7 2.2 6.1 5.8
June 1.5 –1.9 4.1 3.4 5.4 7.6 –6.6 –14.3 9.7 –0.9 2.7 –0.3 8.2
July 5.1 6.8 –1.1 –1.7 –4.7 34.0 8.3 –25.7 24.9 –0.3 3.0 10.2 12.0
Aug. – 6.8 –5.0 –6.1 –1.8 0.3 25.7 –5.3 –31.0 6.6 –2.7 2.7 0.2 6.4
Sep. – 8.2 1.7 0.8 –9.9 –13.3 – 0.1 –2.8 –2.7 21.1 0.1 2.9 11.6 6.4
Oct. – 2.0 0.1 –0.2 –2.1 –5.2 16.2 4.9 –11.3 11.8 –0.1 3.0 5.9 3.0
Nov. 12.2 13.1 –1.1 –0.8 1.8 13.7 –3.4 –17.1 10.6 3.7 3.4 1.0 2.4
Dec. –18.0 –11.1 2.5 –6.9 –5.1 –17.4 –10.6 6.8 8.8 3.2 2.5 1.7 1.4
2024 Jan. 11.1 2.0 –0.5 9.1 6.7 74.5 20.7 –53.7 –1.8 –0.1 2.5 12.7 –17.0
Feb. 10.6 20.2 6.8 –9.6 –7.6 –17.0 40.0 57.1 –6.9 –1.6 2.4 7.7 –15.3
Mar. 8.3 4.3 0.5 4.0 2.0 6.6 4.2 –2.4 –5.3 1.7 1.7 2.4 –11.1
Apr. –13.5 –3.7 –3.9 –9.8 –13.1 41.3 4.2 –37.1 16.0 2.0 0.9 11.2 1.9
May 5.4 14.6 5.7 –9.2 –7.8 17.6 35.0 17.4 19.8 2.7 0.5 5.5 11.1
June 4.2 –4.1 –2.7 8.3 5.1 –24.4 –15.4 9.0 19.8 –0.7 0.4 –2.0 22.1
July 4.2 1.7 –8.6 2.5 2.5 60.0 4.3 –55.7 3.3 –0.2 0.1 –2.8 6.2
* The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also the "Notes on the figures" in the "Explanatory notes" of the
Statistical Series Banking Statistics).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Excluding MFIs' portfolios.  3 Afterdeduction of inter-MFI participations.  4 Including the counterparts of monetary
liabilities of central governments.  5 Including the monetary liabilities of central
governments (Post Office, Treasury).  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.  7 Paper held
by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.  8 Less German MFIs' holdings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
9•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
a) Euro area 1
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2
Money stock M1
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments Total  4of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue Total Total TotalCurrency
in circu-
lationOvernight
deposits  5Deposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 years  5Deposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  5,6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  2,7,8Debt secur-
ities with
maturities
of up to
2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)
(net)  2,7 Period
–84.6 –62.1 0.0 2.7 12.5 –61.6 11.6 –73.2 60.8 13.3 –46.5 2.8 10.4 2022 Dec.
–38.8 127.7 0.0 –133.7 –149.8 –232.0 –13.3 –218.7 76.0 6.1 35.0 6.8 – 8.0 2023 Jan.
20.3 23.2 0.0 –42.1 –63.4 –135.7 –3.5 –132.1 72.2 0.0 – 2.2 –6.4 29.7 Feb.
31.3 30.1 0.0 16.9 10.2 –103.9 3.9 –107.8 119.6 – 5.5 –25.7 20.6 9.4 Mar.
–27.2 –10.9 0.0 – 0.8 –17.9 –52.1 4.1 –56.3 45.6 –11.4 6.7 11.5 0.3 Apr.
–104.4 86.5 0.0 –30.4 –44.9 –94.3 1.7 –96.0 52.9 – 3.5 29.6 1.5 4.2 May
24.5 45.6 0.0 6.5 22.3 –60.9 3.1 –64.0 94.4 –11.2 –11.2 –6.2 – 3.7 June
–29.1 5.6 0.0 0.3 –28.3 –91.0 3.0 –94.1 73.3 –10.6 4.1 10.6 – 0.9 July
–20.0 5.0 0.0 –43.4 –45.1 –101.9 –7.6 –94.2 81.1 –24.3 4.4 8.4 0.8 Aug.
35.1 –13.3 0.0 46.5 44.6 –11.6 –3.1 – 8.5 79.8 –23.6 – 5.8 –0.7 – 2.1 Sep.
–28.5 60.4 0.0 –44.9 –87.9 –169.1 –4.4 –164.8 102.9 –21.7 25.2 18.8 8.4 Oct.
–48.4 42.8 0.0 76.3 54.4 18.3 –2.9 21.3 48.8 –12.7 22.3 16.9 –10.1 Nov.
14.4 –225.7 0.0 166.9 166.2 71.7 13.8 57.9 75.8 18.7 –27.1 14.4 – 2.1 Dec.
18.9 146.5 0.0 –132.4 –181.5 –238.0 –16.9 –221.1 61.0 – 4.4 27.2 30.8 1.7 2024 Jan.
9.1 5.4 0.0 1.2 15.2 –31.0 –0.7 –30.3 55.8 – 9.6 5.2 –11.4 – 5.6 Feb.
–26.8 –28.7 0.0 121.7 103.9 58.1 5.4 52.7 46.7 – 0.8 23.9 15.7 – 9.3 Mar.
23.9 42.9 0.0 26.7 –23.5 –18.4 2.5 –20.8 –1.8 – 3.3 6.5 22.6 6.7 Apr.
–24.3 16.5 0.0 22.1 48.7 32.5 2.8 29.6 10.2 6.0 – 3.5 –21.5 – 6.1 May
4.1 –80.4 0.0 140.6 150.3 139.8 7.0 132.9 12.3 – 1.8 8.5 9.6 – 4.3 June
–27.3 93.1 0.0 –15.8 –71.7 –81.1 4.1 –85.1 15.2 – 5.8 26.5 19.8 – 6.1 July
b) German contribution
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10
of which: Components of the money stock
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments TotalIntra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9,11Currency
in circu-
lation TotalOvernight
depositsDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  7,8maturities
with
maturities
of up to 2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)(net)  7 Period
– 16.3 – 24.6 2.1 2.4 – 24.6 – 37.6 19.0 – 4.1 – 2.0 0.1 0.0 2022 Dec.
– 42.9 147.9 2.3 – 5.1 – 0.2 – 37.1 38.4 – 6.5 – 0.1 – 0.2 5.4 2023 Jan.
12.9 50.9 1.1 – 0.7 0.4 – 33.2 32.6 – 8.0 1.3 – 0.1 7.8 Feb.
27.1 – 34.8 2.3 0.9 – 15.5 – 45.7 31.8 – 10.4 – 0.2 0.3 8.7 Mar.
– 39.0 86.7 1.9 0.7 6.3 – 11.7 25.3 – 10.2 0.7 0.2 1.9 Apr.
– 11.8 2.8 2.6 0.9 6.7 – 6.2 18.4 – 10.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 5.1 May
– 9.8 8.4 1.7 1.1 0.8 – 29.2 36.7 – 10.0 – 0.3 – 0.0 3.6 June
– 6.4 20.0 1.6 1.3 0.7 – 21.8 31.5 – 10.3 0.3 0.3 0.8 July
7.4 – 1.5 2.9 – 1.9 6.4 – 21.1 30.4 – 11.2 1.1 0.1 7.1 Aug.
– 11.6 – 12.1 3.6 – 1.7 – 5.7 – 13.3 17.8 – 8.6 – 1.0 0.1 – 0.7 Sep.
– 2.4 2.9 1.5 – 0.5 1.9 – 31.2 38.8 – 9.4 0.8 – 0.1 3.0 Oct.
– 9.5 13.9 1.1 – 0.4 11.1 9.4 11.7 – 10.5 1.1 0.1 – 0.8 Nov.
7.7 – 62.1 2.4 2.8 10.2 – 6.6 25.1 – 5.0 – 1.2 0.1 – 2.2 Dec.
– 6.7 108.3 – 7.4 3.7 – 14.3 – 47.5 37.6 – 9.1 3.0 0.1 1.4 2024 Jan.
– 2.3 0.0 2.4 – 0.6 2.7 – 18.3 27.1 – 7.4 1.0 0.0 0.3 Feb.
2.0 – 2.1 2.9 0.7 20.3 2.8 24.9 – 5.8 – 1.5 0.2 – 0.3 Mar.
– 2.9 23.7 1.8 1.5 – 9.1 – 4.4 6.1 – 5.5 – 0.3 0.2 – 5.2 Apr.
3.5 – 26.8 2.4 0.4 26.5 27.6 5.0 – 4.1 – 0.3 0.1 – 1.8 May
– 4.3 – 39.8 1.6 1.7 4.1 1.3 2.3 – 4.5 0.8 0.1 4.2 June
– 6.1 71.9 2.9 1.7 – 4.9 – 7.9 9.3 – 4.2 0.7 0.3 – 3.1 July
of paper issued by euro area MFIs.  9 Including national banknotes still in circulation.
10 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates should on no
account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are therefore not
comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.  11 Thedifference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank
and the amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the
Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
10•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
End of
monthTotal
assets or
liabilities Total Total LoansDebt
securities  2Shares and
other
equities Total LoansDebt
securities  3 
 
Claims
on non-
euro area
residentsOther
assets
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2022 June 33,885.6 21,885.9 15,373.3 12,973.4 1,568.8 831.1 6,512.7 1,003.0 5,509.7 7,064.7 4,935.0
July 33,877.2 21,984.6 15,451.2 13,043.7 1,578.2 829.2 6,533.4 1,003.0 5,530.4 7,217.0 4,675.6
Aug. 34,342.7 21,872.8 15,459.5 13,080.1 1,553.8 825.7 6,413.2 996.9 5,416.4 7,301.8 5,168.2
Sep. 34,619.2 21,901.8 15,558.1 13,191.3 1,545.0 821.7 6,343.7 998.1 5,345.5 7,241.9 5,475.6
Oct. 34,548.1 21,891.0 15,552.2 13,190.1 1,532.9 829.3 6,338.8 995.2 5,343.6 7,334.8 5,322.3
Nov. 34,224.4 22,011.9 15,627.4 13,228.2 1,559.0 840.1 6,384.5 990.3 5,394.2 7,206.6 5,005.9
Dec. 33,866.5 21,792.8 15,515.3 13,123.9 1,556.1 835.4 6,277.5 999.1 5,278.4 6,873.6 5,200.2
2023 Jan. 33,815.1 21,884.1 15,553.5 13,173.2 1,544.7 835.6 6,330.6 1,000.3 5,330.3 6,984.1 4,946.9
Feb. 34,096.9 21,862.9 15,545.5 13,159.9 1,541.1 844.6 6,317.4 991.3 5,326.2 7,001.8 5,232.1
Mar. 33,934.6 21,919.6 15,573.6 13,173.8 1,552.4 847.4 6,346.0 995.4 5,350.6 7,099.6 4,915.4
Apr. 33,944.3 21,909.0 15,601.1 13,168.5 1,566.5 866.2 6,307.9 991.1 5,316.8 7,038.5 4,996.8
May 34,131.0 21,919.7 15,651.1 13,186.0 1,595.7 869.4 6,268.7 995.4 5,273.2 7,150.9 5,060.3
June 34,042.2 21,915.5 15,637.3 13,182.3 1,584.5 870.4 6,278.2 988.5 5,289.7 7,066.1 5,060.6
July 34,175.7 21,867.2 15,642.3 13,180.8 1,586.4 875.1 6,224.9 988.2 5,236.7 7,153.4 5,155.2
Aug. 34,227.8 21,811.9 15,573.8 13,123.8 1,576.8 873.2 6,238.1 986.1 5,252.0 7,251.6 5,164.3
Sep. 34,370.3 21,796.9 15,601.8 13,156.3 1,574.7 870.9 6,195.0 987.3 5,207.8 7,195.8 5,377.6
Oct. 34,329.4 21,755.4 15,598.7 13,167.0 1,555.7 876.0 6,156.7 984.1 5,172.6 7,262.7 5,311.3
Nov. 34,125.5 21,851.9 15,660.3 13,220.8 1,558.6 881.0 6,191.6 980.8 5,210.7 7,252.0 5,021.6
Dec. 33,753.8 21,859.7 15,626.9 13,177.4 1,552.2 897.3 6,232.9 989.4 5,243.4 7,143.5 4,750.6
2024 Jan. 33,828.6 21,827.2 15,622.9 13,145.8 1,569.5 907.5 6,204.3 987.6 5,216.7 7,293.5 4,708.0
Feb. 34,002.0 21,841.1 15,654.0 13,167.9 1,569.9 916.2 6,187.2 977.4 5,209.8 7,382.8 4,778.1
Mar. 34,217.8 21,915.1 15,704.4 13,208.4 1,567.4 928.6 6,210.7 977.0 5,233.7 7,545.7 4,757.1
Apr. 34,395.4 21,919.6 15,722.0 13,231.3 1,562.4 928.3 6,197.6 980.4 5,217.2 7,599.2 4,876.7
May 34,361.6 21,896.6 15,721.0 13,231.8 1,559.6 929.6 6,175.6 977.7 5,197.9 7,642.0 4,823.0
June 34,372.5 21,981.4 15,783.8 13,302.3 1,563.4 918.2 6,197.6 980.7 5,216.9 7,672.3 4,718.7
July 34,380.9 21,986.7 15,786.6 13,317.7 1,545.4 923.5 6,200.0 975.7 5,224.3 7,743.2 4,651.1
German contribution (€ billion)
2022 June 8,413.5 5,322.6 4,058.9 3,537.6 237.8 283.5 1,263.7 282.5 981.2 1,466.1 1,624.8
July 8,287.9 5,375.0 4,096.1 3,560.3 252.7 283.2 1,278.8 283.6 995.2 1,481.5 1,431.4
Aug. 8,546.0 5,364.5 4,132.0 3,600.0 249.1 282.9 1,232.5 281.5 951.0 1,492.4 1,689.0
Sep. 8,857.6 5,356.3 4,153.9 3,624.8 246.1 283.0 1,202.4 284.3 918.1 1,502.4 1,998.8
Oct. 8,826.7 5,366.0 4,163.6 3,634.6 245.9 283.1 1,202.4 284.8 917.5 1,509.0 1,951.8
Nov. 8,653.9 5,402.0 4,189.2 3,656.3 249.8 283.1 1,212.8 283.4 929.4 1,502.4 1,749.6
Dec. 8,626.1 5,345.2 4,165.8 3,636.7 245.9 283.2 1,179.4 283.2 896.1 1,417.3 1,863.7
2023 Jan. 8,561.4 5,377.1 4,178.3 3,652.7 245.9 279.7 1,198.8 285.0 913.9 1,443.8 1,740.5
Feb. 8,712.0 5,371.7 4,186.6 3,662.2 243.6 280.9 1,185.1 284.0 901.1 1,443.9 1,896.4
Mar. 8,573.5 5,388.1 4,193.6 3,661.9 252.1 279.6 1,194.5 284.2 910.3 1,457.2 1,728.2
Apr. 8,559.3 5,383.7 4,206.2 3,672.7 252.4 281.1 1,177.5 287.7 889.8 1,435.7 1,739.8
May 8,614.3 5,389.9 4,217.4 3,685.4 252.1 279.9 1,172.6 286.1 886.4 1,468.3 1,756.1
June 8,647.9 5,387.4 4,215.9 3,679.0 255.5 281.4 1,171.5 284.2 887.4 1,433.5 1,826.9
July 8,779.6 5,390.2 4,222.0 3,685.7 255.6 280.6 1,168.3 287.2 881.1 1,439.0 1,950.5
Aug. 8,776.6 5,383.7 4,215.6 3,685.5 249.4 280.6 1,168.1 285.0 883.0 1,442.2 1,950.7
Sep. 8,834.2 5,362.1 4,216.4 3,686.3 248.5 281.5 1,145.8 288.4 857.4 1,446.5 2,025.5
Oct. 8,844.5 5,360.6 4,215.5 3,685.5 247.9 282.1 1,145.1 291.6 853.5 1,461.4 2,022.6
Nov. 8,661.3 5,385.7 4,228.0 3,697.3 248.4 282.3 1,157.8 289.7 868.1 1,446.0 1,829.6
Dec. 8,491.7 5,384.9 4,217.3 3,682.2 247.9 287.2 1,167.6 287.1 880.5 1,432.1 1,674.6
2024 Jan. 8,532.9 5,390.7 4,218.3 3,682.5 246.2 289.6 1,172.4 289.5 882.9 1,463.2 1,679.1
Feb. 8,600.8 5,391.4 4,236.7 3,694.8 250.2 291.7 1,154.7 287.7 867.0 1,502.2 1,707.2
Mar. 8,586.9 5,404.4 4,241.0 3,697.7 246.0 297.3 1,163.4 289.8 873.7 1,524.9 1,657.5
Apr. 8,673.8 5,380.1 4,235.7 3,697.3 244.1 294.3 1,144.4 293.1 851.3 1,544.0 1,749.8
May 8,644.6 5,383.0 4,248.9 3,704.9 246.6 297.4 1,134.1 291.8 842.3 1,573.2 1,688.4
June 8,574.0 5,393.1 4,244.9 3,703.4 247.7 293.7 1,148.2 295.0 853.2 1,566.2 1,614.8
July 8,452.0 5,404.5 4,245.9 3,712.0 237.5 296.3 1,158.6 295.1 863.5 1,571.2 1,476.3
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national
central banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Including money market paper ofenterprises.  3 Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by general
government.  4 Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p.12●). Excluding
MFIs` cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
11•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed
maturities ofAt agreed
notice of  6
Currency
in
circulation  4 Totalof which:
in euro  5 Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 monthsEnd of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
1,535.1 16,099.7 14,633.8 14,810.3 9,643.8 704.8 123.4 1,800.3 2,510.4 27.5 2022 June
1,543.7 16,183.5 14,738.8 14,937.4 9,735.4 741.0 127.1 1,791.0 2,515.8 27.1 July
1,539.1 16,161.1 14,793.6 14,985.4 9,754.1 781.5 125.9 1,770.0 2,526.0 28.0 Aug.
1,537.7 16,198.7 14,785.5 15,036.3 9,688.0 913.3 125.5 1,756.3 2,525.7 27.6 Sep.
1,537.2 16,095.0 14,708.1 14,936.4 9,507.1 992.6 130.1 1,741.6 2,522.9 42.1 Oct.
1,533.7 16,084.4 14,722.6 14,917.3 9,441.8 1,042.2 134.2 1,740.7 2,516.0 42.3 Nov.
1,545.3 15,996.8 14,766.2 14,929.6 9,373.7 1,099.5 133.9 1,750.1 2,530.0 42.4 Dec.
1,533.4 15,876.1 14,667.2 14,844.5 9,206.0 1,165.1 146.4 1,746.7 2,532.0 48.2 2023 Jan.
1,529.9 15,842.9 14,625.3 14,773.4 9,061.7 1,225.3 157.6 1,747.0 2,531.8 49.9 Feb.
1,533.8 15,891.9 14,649.7 14,788.7 8,967.7 1,313.9 174.0 1,756.9 2,524.8 51.4 Mar.
1,537.9 15,848.9 14,650.2 14,784.8 8,918.2 1,346.2 187.9 1,765.8 2,513.9 52.8 Apr.
1,539.7 15,718.0 14,618.0 14,756.7 8,834.7 1,387.5 200.1 1,768.2 2,511.0 55.2 May
1,542.7 15,760.5 14,649.9 14,755.8 8,755.6 1,455.8 218.3 1,768.4 2,499.8 58.0 June
1,545.9 15,696.0 14,619.8 14,725.4 8,662.9 1,512.2 231.6 1,768.5 2,489.2 60.9 July
1,538.3 15,646.8 14,595.4 14,694.0 8,578.0 1,579.2 240.9 1,765.9 2,465.1 65.0 Aug.
1,535.2 15,756.0 14,654.7 14,766.5 8,569.2 1,647.6 255.2 1,782.7 2,441.7 70.1 Sep.
1,530.8 15,636.6 14,576.9 14,702.2 8,421.3 1,736.5 275.6 1,773.4 2,420.5 74.9 Oct.
1,527.9 15,648.3 14,645.5 14,759.2 8,426.3 1,776.1 286.2 1,782.0 2,408.0 80.6 Nov.
1,541.7 15,822.6 14,816.0 14,927.5 8,489.3 1,826.8 302.1 1,795.3 2,427.3 86.7 Dec.
1,524.2 15,687.2 14,668.3 14,801.5 8,295.5 1,879.2 317.0 1,793.6 2,423.4 92.8 2024 Jan.
1,523.5 15,709.3 14,689.3 14,792.0 8,241.0 1,924.1 325.3 1,790.1 2,413.7 97.8 Feb.
1,528.9 15,792.0 14,786.0 14,897.9 8,297.0 1,964.2 327.5 1,795.6 2,412.7 100.9 Mar.
1,531.4 15,780.1 14,757.6 14,899.5 8,292.2 1,977.9 328.1 1,788.2 2,409.6 103.5 Apr.
1,534.2 15,826.2 14,819.5 14,960.6 8,321.2 2,000.0 328.6 1,789.7 2,415.9 105.2 May
1,541.2 15,990.4 14,963.9 15,083.4 8,422.0 2,020.4 325.6 1,794.6 2,414.4 106.4 June
1,545.2 15,878.4 14,869.0 15,025.6 8,358.9 2,042.1 322.3 1,785.9 2,408.9 107.4 July
German contribution (€ billion)
349.9 4,517.1 4,194.6 4,031.6 2,787.1 127.8 30.1 531.9 532.3 22.4 2022 June
359.0 4,507.6 4,222.4 4,070.3 2,813.6 142.1 31.0 530.6 530.6 22.3 July
371.5 4,552.6 4,289.4 4,135.2 2,870.1 153.3 30.6 530.7 528.3 22.2 Aug.
371.8 4,541.5 4,267.4 4,135.1 2,834.9 193.7 30.9 530.3 523.0 22.2 Sep.
371.8 4,546.8 4,270.2 4,140.4 2,804.0 233.2 31.6 529.3 519.8 22.4 Oct.
371.5 4,578.7 4,283.7 4,146.3 2,806.0 240.1 32.1 531.0 514.4 22.6 Nov.
374.0 4,534.2 4,260.8 4,119.2 2,764.3 260.2 34.1 527.1 510.4 23.0 Dec.
368.9 4,489.3 4,257.7 4,126.0 2,749.9 286.6 36.9 529.6 499.1 24.0 2023 Jan.
368.1 4,496.6 4,250.9 4,106.5 2,706.5 314.2 39.1 530.3 491.2 25.2 Feb.
369.0 4,505.7 4,236.8 4,090.4 2,667.4 336.4 42.4 536.3 481.0 26.8 Mar.
369.8 4,473.0 4,248.0 4,104.2 2,660.3 360.2 46.1 538.3 471.0 28.3 Apr.
370.7 4,469.7 4,256.0 4,103.8 2,647.5 373.8 50.3 540.9 460.8 30.5 May
371.7 4,460.3 4,259.3 4,096.2 2,616.5 400.5 54.1 541.0 450.9 33.2 June
373.1 4,455.4 4,259.2 4,106.1 2,603.8 426.9 57.6 540.8 440.7 36.2 July
371.2 4,460.4 4,259.8 4,101.7 2,577.8 455.8 61.5 538.1 429.6 38.9 Aug.
369.4 4,448.9 4,258.5 4,104.2 2,568.6 468.0 66.2 538.5 421.1 41.8 Sep.
369.0 4,447.4 4,259.3 4,129.3 2,553.2 507.9 73.1 538.5 411.7 44.8 Oct.
368.6 4,454.3 4,281.0 4,149.1 2,561.8 515.9 79.5 542.6 401.2 48.3 Nov.
371.4 4,470.1 4,290.9 4,150.5 2,539.8 532.4 84.0 547.3 396.2 50.8 Dec.
375.1 4,448.1 4,271.5 4,150.1 2,502.4 569.5 89.5 548.1 387.2 53.4 2024 Jan.
374.5 4,447.8 4,273.8 4,147.4 2,481.0 590.5 94.7 545.6 379.8 55.8 Feb.
375.2 4,475.1 4,300.5 4,166.8 2,483.2 607.5 97.0 547.6 374.1 57.4 Mar.
376.6 4,471.9 4,300.6 4,182.7 2,486.3 620.9 98.9 549.6 368.6 58.4 Apr.
377.0 4,506.4 4,331.5 4,204.0 2,501.4 626.2 100.7 552.3 364.5 58.9 May
378.6 4,503.4 4,332.6 4,196.1 2,501.6 619.0 102.5 553.7 360.1 59.2 June
380.3 4,494.0 4,328.2 4,212.6 2,507.1 633.2 103.3 553.6 355.9 59.4 July
euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by theBundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item "Intra-Eurosystem
liability/claim related to banknote issue" (see "Other liability items").  5 Excluding central
governments' deposits.  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
12•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) * (cont'd)
Liabilities (cont'd)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont'd)
General government 
 
Debt securities 
Other general governmentRepo transactions
with non-banks
in the euro area
 
With agreed maturities of 
At agreed notice of  2
End of
monthCentral
govern-
ment Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 months Totalof which:
Enterprises
and
householdsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  3 Totalof which:
Denom-
inated
in euro
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2022 June 786.9 502.5 326.0 90.9 22.9 43.3 16.2 3.2 281.2 281.1 592.9 2,063.0 1,354.8
July 755.9 490.3 303.3 100.4 24.2 42.9 16.2 3.3 306.0 305.9 590.8 2,086.8 1,357.0
Aug. 675.5 500.1 309.7 104.6 24.0 42.5 16.1 3.2 283.8 283.7 597.5 2,106.3 1,368.1
Sep. 683.2 479.1 282.0 111.2 24.5 42.3 16.0 3.2 264.8 264.7 589.1 2,142.4 1,404.3
Oct. 678.1 480.5 287.5 109.2 24.3 41.5 14.7 3.2 268.2 268.2 625.8 2,118.8 1,405.0
Nov. 668.3 498.9 306.5 109.2 25.1 40.8 14.2 3.2 294.8 294.8 648.0 2,149.8 1,432.2
Dec. 583.5 483.7 296.2 103.6 27.2 40.2 13.5 3.0 247.7 247.7 650.9 2,155.0 1,463.5
2023 Jan. 550.6 480.9 283.2 113.2 27.5 40.6 12.8 3.7 283.3 283.3 657.7 2,195.2 1,500.6
Feb. 570.9 498.6 297.5 115.2 28.7 40.3 13.2 3.7 281.6 281.5 651.3 2,247.7 1,520.1
Mar. 602.4 500.8 288.6 125.8 28.4 39.6 14.7 3.7 255.3 255.2 672.0 2,246.0 1,540.4
Apr. 575.3 488.8 278.5 123.3 29.7 39.4 14.2 3.7 261.7 261.3 683.4 2,242.5 1,550.5
May 470.7 490.6 277.9 126.7 29.3 39.4 13.8 3.6 291.9 287.8 685.0 2,288.8 1,579.9
June 495.1 509.5 288.6 134.7 29.4 39.3 13.8 3.6 280.4 280.3 678.8 2,302.0 1,589.6
July 466.0 504.6 281.7 137.7 28.4 39.4 13.9 3.6 284.1 283.4 689.4 2,391.9 1,635.9
Aug. 446.0 506.9 283.2 138.6 28.0 39.6 13.8 3.5 288.9 288.9 698.0 2,409.5 1,645.9
Sep. 481.2 508.2 285.3 136.7 29.3 39.7 13.8 3.4 281.7 281.7 697.3 2,431.8 1,657.7
Oct. 452.7 481.7 266.6 131.0 28.5 39.2 13.1 3.3 306.8 306.6 716.2 2,491.3 1,694.5
Nov. 404.4 484.6 274.9 127.5 27.2 38.9 13.0 3.2 328.5 328.4 733.2 2,489.2 1,696.6
Dec. 418.8 476.3 265.6 128.4 28.4 38.6 12.4 3.1 320.5 320.5 746.5 2,485.3 1,701.1
2024 Jan. 437.3 448.4 238.5 127.8 28.4 37.5 12.2 4.0 345.4 343.4 777.5 2,529.0 1,731.0
Feb. 446.3 470.9 260.7 130.6 26.1 38.1 11.7 3.8 348.0 347.3 766.2 2,538.8 1,749.8
Mar. 419.6 474.5 258.7 135.5 26.9 37.7 12.0 3.7 372.0 371.2 781.9 2,563.6 1,761.7
Apr. 442.7 437.9 232.4 129.8 22.6 37.7 11.8 3.7 378.6 372.2 804.7 2,593.8 1,775.4
May 418.5 447.1 244.2 127.8 22.2 37.7 11.6 3.6 374.8 366.0 784.7 2,579.2 1,771.3
June 422.7 484.3 275.5 133.7 22.8 37.4 11.4 3.5 383.8 383.7 795.7 2,586.8 1,770.8
July 395.4 457.3 253.3 129.5 22.9 36.9 11.2 3.5 410.1 391.9 816.8 2,578.9 1,768.2
German contribution (€ billion)
2022 June 205.0 280.5 147.7 80.5 19.0 31.0 2.2 0.1 5.4 5.4 2.3 604.2 362.6
July 166.8 270.4 128.3 89.0 20.2 30.6 2.2 0.1 9.8 9.8 2.4 613.8 369.1
Aug. 142.7 274.6 129.4 92.2 20.4 30.4 2.2 0.1 8.0 8.0 2.3 625.7 384.5
Sep. 147.4 259.1 109.0 96.6 20.8 30.3 2.2 0.1 5.4 5.4 2.4 640.0 395.3
Oct. 152.5 253.9 108.1 93.1 20.5 30.1 2.1 0.1 5.2 5.2 2.5 633.9 398.1
Nov. 175.5 256.9 114.7 88.9 21.5 29.8 1.9 0.1 8.3 8.3 2.5 634.2 402.6
Dec. 159.2 255.8 117.3 83.2 23.9 29.6 1.8 0.1 6.3 6.3 2.6 631.2 409.3
2023 Jan. 116.4 246.9 99.4 92.2 23.8 29.8 1.6 0.1 6.1 6.1 2.4 639.6 417.9
Feb. 129.3 260.8 110.3 94.6 24.6 29.7 1.5 0.1 7.5 7.5 2.3 651.5 427.1
Mar. 156.4 258.8 102.2 101.4 24.1 29.6 1.4 0.1 7.2 7.2 2.6 658.0 440.3
Apr. 117.4 251.4 97.3 97.8 25.4 29.5 1.3 0.1 7.9 7.9 2.7 654.9 446.8
May 105.6 260.2 104.8 99.5 25.0 29.7 1.2 0.1 7.7 7.7 2.6 670.6 458.1
June 95.9 268.2 106.1 106.5 24.9 29.5 1.1 0.1 7.3 7.3 2.6 671.6 452.8
July 89.5 259.9 96.6 109.1 23.7 29.5 0.9 0.1 7.6 7.6 2.9 679.9 457.6
Aug. 96.8 261.9 100.9 107.1 23.3 29.6 0.9 0.1 8.7 8.7 3.0 688.8 469.0
Sep. 85.2 259.5 97.5 107.0 24.5 29.6 0.8 0.1 7.8 7.8 3.0 705.6 470.0
Oct. 82.8 235.3 81.6 99.3 24.1 29.4 0.7 0.1 8.5 8.5 2.9 713.0 476.3
Nov. 73.3 231.8 81.2 97.7 22.7 29.2 0.7 0.1 9.6 9.6 3.0 706.2 471.0
Dec. 81.1 238.6 84.9 100.3 23.9 28.6 0.7 0.1 8.4 8.4 3.2 699.9 476.8
2024 Jan. 74.4 223.6 75.5 95.6 24.0 27.8 0.7 0.1 11.4 11.4 3.3 717.4 486.5
Feb. 72.0 228.4 78.6 98.8 21.6 28.6 0.6 0.1 12.4 12.4 3.3 727.1 494.5
Mar. 74.0 234.4 79.3 103.5 22.5 28.3 0.6 0.1 11.0 10.9 3.5 727.8 501.4
Apr. 71.2 218.0 72.0 97.9 19.3 28.2 0.6 0.1 10.6 10.6 3.7 737.0 505.8
May 74.7 227.7 83.8 96.1 18.9 28.2 0.6 0.1 10.3 10.3 3.8 738.4 508.7
June 70.5 236.9 85.4 103.0 19.9 27.9 0.5 0.1 11.1 11.1 4.0 741.5 506.2
July 64.4 217.1 71.7 97.3 19.9 27.6 0.5 0.1 11.9 11.9 4.2 731.7 506.8
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national central
banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 In Germany, only savings deposits.
3 Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding German MFIs'
portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area.  4 In Germany, bank debt
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper.5 Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued.  6 After deduction of inter-MFI
participations.  7 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.
8 Including DEM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on p. 10●). 9 For
the German contribution, the difference between the volume of euro banknotes

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
13•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  Memo item:
Other liability items  
 
issued (net)  3Monetary aggregates  7
(from 2002 German contribution
excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
up to
1 year  4over
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsLiabilities
to non-
euro area
residents  5Capital
and
reserves  6Excess
of
inter-MFI
liabilities Total  8of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem-
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12Monetary
capital
forma-
tion  13Monetary
liabilities
of central
govern-
ments
(Post
Office,
Treasury)  14 End of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
47.8 14.4 2,000.8 5,719.5 2,905.3 26.4 4,662.5 0.0 11,680.1 15,173.2 15,943.0 6,780.5 199.6 2022 June
15.1 16.4 2,055.4 5,863.1 2,970.9 8.3 4,324.1 0.0 11,762.6 15,311.3 16,066.2 6,890.6 204.2 July
16.7 19.0 2,070.6 5,915.0 2,890.6 34.5 4,814.9 0.0 11,776.2 15,378.0 16,137.5 6,804.9 197.0 Aug.
34.9 19.5 2,088.0 5,899.0 2,845.2 16.9 5,125.6 0.0 11,681.6 15,419.9 16,180.2 6,762.6 196.2 Sep.
3.8 23.9 2,091.1 6,038.8 2,819.4 38.2 5,006.8 0.0 11,505.4 15,322.1 16,100.0 6,738.8 196.4 Oct.
23.7 22.8 2,103.3 5,881.3 2,857.4 66.3 4,708.5 0.0 11,459.9 15,323.0 16,151.7 6,787.6 200.1 Nov.
31.7 23.2 2,100.0 5,553.5 2,820.5 58.0 4,838.9 0.0 11,381.7 15,315.5 16,131.8 6,756.3 192.7 Dec.
17.6 27.9 2,149.7 5,636.6 2,862.7 86.0 4,684.1 0.0 11,192.9 15,211.1 16,042.9 6,851.7 191.6 2023 Jan.
47.0 30.4 2,170.3 5,670.8 2,811.6 79.8 4,981.3 0.0 11,060.3 15,153.2 16,008.8 6,822.8 192.2 Feb.
54.0 30.4 2,161.7 5,657.4 2,893.9 82.5 4,701.8 0.0 10,949.5 15,154.1 16,013.5 6,907.2 182.5 Mar.
50.2 32.9 2,159.4 5,633.5 2,886.1 110.4 4,739.9 0.0 10,894.5 15,132.7 16,007.4 6,907.3 182.9 Apr.
56.0 32.8 2,200.0 5,722.1 2,903.2 155.5 4,826.8 0.0 10,807.7 15,099.1 15,990.6 6,969.5 178.5 May
49.8 33.0 2,219.3 5,584.4 2,880.3 147.2 4,865.8 0.0 10,742.3 15,116.8 15,989.8 6,968.9 178.0 June
47.0 34.0 2,311.0 5,594.1 2,898.4 102.5 4,973.4 0.0 10,648.3 15,083.9 15,984.3 7,081.8 180.5 July
50.1 33.4 2,326.0 5,656.5 2,917.4 122.1 4,950.3 0.0 10,553.8 15,042.0 15,946.1 7,117.5 176.9 Aug.
45.1 36.4 2,350.4 5,541.1 2,878.4 113.5 5,135.3 0.0 10,547.2 15,094.2 16,001.0 7,124.7 180.3 Sep.
54.5 36.6 2,400.2 5,511.8 2,906.2 121.7 5,108.0 0.0 10,375.9 15,003.5 15,954.5 7,197.1 179.6 Oct.
45.2 36.0 2,408.1 5,446.4 2,935.7 165.3 4,851.1 0.0 10,387.7 15,047.8 16,020.2 7,248.5 180.8 Nov.
46.0 34.8 2,404.5 5,299.3 3,003.3 56.1 4,478.3 0.0 10,446.0 15,199.4 16,192.2 7,331.5 177.4 Dec.
40.5 36.1 2,452.3 5,334.6 2,992.4 105.8 4,532.5 0.0 10,212.5 15,026.6 16,060.4 7,372.6 180.3 2024 Jan.
33.5 36.3 2,469.0 5,447.9 2,955.4 99.1 4,613.9 0.0 10,182.0 15,039.4 16,057.9 7,354.2 182.7 Feb.
22.2 40.0 2,501.4 5,483.1 3,020.8 106.0 4,569.5 0.0 10,240.0 15,143.3 16,181.4 7,460.1 179.9 Mar.
28.4 39.5 2,525.9 5,462.5 3,020.9 107.0 4,716.4 0.0 10,223.2 15,123.2 16,210.8 7,479.8 187.4 Apr.
18.4 42.5 2,518.4 5,463.8 3,023.4 104.9 4,670.5 0.0 10,252.6 15,178.7 16,239.9 7,478.0 173.0 May
14.6 43.5 2,528.7 5,421.0 3,064.1 69.4 4,520.1 0.0 10,394.7 15,343.9 16,398.9 7,534.6 176.8 June
11.6 41.4 2,525.9 5,389.5 3,120.9 108.6 4,532.6 0.0 10,311.7 15,269.6 16,382.7 7,580.6 175.2 July
German contribution (€ billion)
18.7 6.6 578.9 1,317.0 743.1 –1,255.4 2,479.8 530.5 2,934.8 3,726.6 3,759.7 1,907.5 0.0 2022 June
21.2 6.8 585.8 1,287.5 779.7 –1,189.6 2,276.7 525.2 2,941.9 3,757.1 3,797.3 1,949.2 0.0 July
21.8 7.6 596.2 1,349.3 739.6 –1,271.6 2,540.1 513.5 2,999.5 3,826.5 3,866.3 1,919.1 0.0 Aug.
27.5 8.1 604.3 1,385.2 711.9 –1,287.1 2,858.3 516.8 2,944.0 3,811.2 3,854.6 1,899.2 0.0 Sep.
19.1 9.7 605.0 1,355.1 693.8 –1,215.2 2,804.7 516.8 2,912.1 3,812.3 3,848.8 1,880.8 0.0 Oct.
20.8 11.2 602.2 1,310.2 714.6 –1,191.2 2,596.7 516.8 2,920.8 3,819.7 3,862.5 1,900.3 0.0 Nov.
20.2 11.7 599.3 1,265.7 690.1 –1,230.4 2,726.5 518.9 2,881.6 3,795.1 3,835.9 1,869.2 0.0 Dec.
24.0 13.1 602.4 1,226.5 689.1 –1,117.5 2,625.9 521.2 2,849.3 3,789.5 3,835.2 1,874.9 0.0 2023 Jan.
29.3 15.8 606.4 1,171.8 668.4 –1,073.2 2,787.2 522.2 2,816.8 3,782.0 3,836.8 1,860.1 0.0 Feb.
36.2 17.5 604.3 1,188.0 700.6 –1,129.7 2,641.2 524.5 2,769.6 3,756.4 3,819.8 1,897.7 0.0 Mar.
37.0 18.5 599.4 1,107.1 704.2 –1,028.5 2,637.8 526.4 2,757.6 3,759.4 3,825.5 1,899.8 0.0 Apr.
41.2 19.5 609.9 1,122.5 715.6 –1,036.9 2,662.4 529.0 2,752.3 3,762.8 3,833.9 1,926.7 0.0 May
44.6 19.2 607.9 1,099.9 709.8 –1,026.8 2,723.1 530.7 2,722.6 3,760.6 3,834.2 1,921.6 0.0 June
44.5 19.9 615.4 1,070.7 724.0 –996.4 2,835.7 532.2 2,700.4 3,759.3 3,834.2 1,946.1 0.0 July
51.0 20.6 617.2 1,044.4 734.2 –998.8 2,835.9 535.1 2,678.7 3,756.9 3,840.1 1,958.1 0.0 Aug.
48.5 22.6 634.5 1,048.4 722.8 –1,000.9 2,898.6 538.7 2,666.2 3,753.7 3,835.5 1,967.4 0.0 Sep.
49.7 24.4 639.0 1,035.9 735.9 –998.0 2,898.7 540.2 2,634.8 3,751.7 3,837.2 1,987.9 0.0 Oct.
49.6 23.6 633.1 1,012.0 753.5 –983.0 2,705.7 541.3 2,643.0 3,760.7 3,846.5 2,006.8 0.0 Nov.
45.9 25.0 629.0 1,016.2 778.6 –1,034.8 2,550.2 543.7 2,624.7 3,762.2 3,844.6 2,034.5 0.0 Dec.
46.9 25.6 645.0 967.8 758.4 –959.8 2,586.3 536.2 2,577.9 3,744.3 3,831.5 2,032.8 0.0 2024 Jan.
46.4 26.4 654.4 1,024.7 731.1 –992.0 2,646.3 538.6 2,559.6 3,745.7 3,834.2 2,015.6 0.0 Feb.
45.7 26.7 655.4 1,022.6 744.6 –988.1 2,590.4 541.5 2,562.4 3,767.6 3,854.5 2,033.5 0.0 Mar.
40.9 26.3 669.7 987.7 747.2 –960.2 2,676.0 543.3 2,558.3 3,764.4 3,846.0 2,053.2 0.0 Apr.
39.6 25.8 673.1 1,001.7 746.9 –986.7 2,623.7 545.7 2,585.2 3,792.3 3,871.8 2,059.4 0.0 May
43.9 25.7 671.9 1,015.1 777.5 –1,013.2 2,534.5 547.3 2,587.0 3,792.0 3,876.7 2,090.4 0.0 June
40.9 25.5 665.3 956.7 798.5 –969.5 2,424.4 550.2 2,578.8 3,789.0 3,871.5 2,104.5 0.0 July
actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2).  10 Overnight deposits (excluding central governments'
deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central governments'
overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the consolidated balance
sheet.  11 M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to two years and at agreednotice of up to three months (excluding central governments' deposits) and (for the
euro area) central governments' monetary liabilities with such maturities.  12 M2 plus
repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt securities
up to two years.  13 Deposits with agreed maturities of over two years and at agreed
notice of over three months, debt securities with maturities of over two years, capital
and reserves.  14 Non-existent in Germany.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
14•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
3. Banking systems liquidity position *
Stocks
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8
Eurosystem 2
2022 Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 950.1 1.7 2,124.9 0.0 4,954.8 707.0 0.0 1,585.3 553.9 1,249.2 3,936.1 6,228.5
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 955.8 4.0 2,118.8 0.0 4,948.3 4,490.0 0.0 1,563.7 536.7 1,104.4 332.0 6,385.7
Dec. 960.4 1.9 1,947.1 0.0 4,946.1 4,521.5 0.0 1,560.8 492.5 1,066.9 213.8 6,296.2
2023 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 940.4 1.2 1,303.3 0.1 4,942.1 4,051.6 0.0 1,565.6 372.8 1,001.6 195.6 5,812.7
Mar. 916.8 0.9 1,233.3 0.0 4,939.0 4,103.0 0.0 1,553.9 380.2 861.8 191.1 5,848.0
Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 945.0 1.4 1,117.7 0.1 4,905.6 3,996.1 0.0 1,559.8 360.6 870.5 182.7 5,738.6
June 948.2 1.6 1,100.5 0.1 4,884.1 4,126.4 0.0 1,563.7 256.4 806.6 181.6 5,871.7
July . . . . . . . . . . . .
Aug. 927.8 10.9 682.0 0.1 4,853.0 3,704.4 0.0 1,567.0 254.4 770.5 177.4 5,448.9
Sep. 924.3 5.6 601.0 0.1 4,811.2 3,647.4 0.0 1,564.2 222.5 733.8 174.3 5,386.0
Oct. 931.2 8.1 515.4 0.1 4,767.9 3,577.4 0.0 1,554.7 222.7 693.3 174.6 5,306.7
Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec. 933.3 7.3 495.9 0.0 4,715.0 3,548.8 0.0 1,551.1 194.1 685.3 172.0 5,271.9
2024 Jan. 958.3 7.9 396.2 0.1 4,686.8 3,487.4 0.0 1,556.7 168.4 666.3 170.5 5,214.6
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 966.5 4.8 397.3 0.0 4,646.4 3,490.9 0.0 1,543.2 168.5 643.8 168.6 5,202.7
Apr. 1,002.8 2.8 249.4 0.0 4,599.5 3,337.9 0.0 1,546.1 137.8 664.3 168.4 5,052.3
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 1,031.7 2.5 149.1 0.0 4,550.7 3,214.0 0.0 1,551.5 119.5 682.3 166.7 4,932.1
July 1,063.7 5.7 104.9 0.0 4,494.3 3,113.2 0.0 1,559.5 115.2 712.7 168.1 4,840.8
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Deutsche Bundesbank
2022 Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 232.1 0.3 403.6 0.0 1,076.8 228.5 0.0 379.5 157.9 – 161.8 1,108.8 1,716.8
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 231.7 0.8 400.5 0.0 1,071.5 1,304.0 0.0 379.0 127.2 – 231.4 125.9 1,808.8
Dec. 232.4 0.5 352.5 0.0 1,079.2 1,346.6 0.0 378.8 121.0 – 242.4 60.5 1,785.9
2023 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 229.8 0.4 231.9 0.1 1,076.8 1,234.6 0.0 377.2 77.8 – 205.4 54.8 1,666.7
Mar. 228.9 0.4 212.8 0.0 1,077.0 1,263.7 0.0 374.5 69.2 – 242.5 54.2 1,692.4
Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 239.2 0.7 200.2 0.1 1,066.1 1,228.0 0.0 375.7 73.4 – 221.1 50.1 1,653.9
June 241.7 0.7 198.9 0.1 1,056.8 1,256.3 0.0 377.2 54.7 – 241.8 52.0 1,685.4
July . . . . . . . . . . . .
Aug. 236.2 1.5 142.4 0.1 1,048.8 1,175.5 0.0 377.5 49.9 – 222.5 48.4 1,601.5
Sep. 234.5 0.8 131.2 0.1 1,041.3 1,177.8 0.0 377.3 40.1 – 235.4 48.0 1,603.1
Oct. 235.7 1.3 96.3 0.0 1,024.0 1,151.1 0.0 374.9 28.7 – 245.4 47.9 1,574.0
Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec. 236.8 0.7 89.2 0.0 1,016.7 1,171.3 0.0 373.5 18.9 – 267.7 47.3 1,592.1
2024 Jan. 243.9 0.9 69.5 0.1 1,005.8 1,127.3 0.0 379.3 19.8 – 253.3 47.0 1,553.6
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 246.5 0.7 69.3 0.0 996.7 1,164.4 0.0 379.2 16.3 – 293.4 46.7 1,590.3
Apr. 257.8 0.7 40.4 0.0 983.5 1,122.4 0.0 379.4 17.1 – 282.5 45.9 1,547.7
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 265.9 0.6 21.3 0.0 970.0 1,102.8 0.0 380.9 13.5 – 285.8 46.3 1,530.0
July 275.7 0.7 15.7 0.0 954.3 1,092.8 0.0 383.0 12.1 – 287.6 46.1 1,521.9
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Discrepancies may arise from rounding.  * The banking system's liquidity position is
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro area credit institutions with the
Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of the
Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  1 Figures are daily averages
for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following the
changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No figuresare available in such cases.  2 Source: ECB.  3 Includes liquidity provided under the
Eurosystem's asset purchase programmes.  4 From August 2009 includes liquidity
absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem's foreign exchange swap operations.  5 From
2002 euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national cen-
tral banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In accordance with the
accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a
share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
15•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Flows
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1
Eurosystem 2
. . . . . . . . . . . .2022 Aug.
+ 6.4 + 0.7 –24.5 ± 0.0 – 4.0 +28.3 ± 0.0 –18.7 –113.7 +91.2 – 7.2 + 2.5 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
+ 5.7 + 2.3 – 6.1 ± 0.0 – 6.5 +3,783.0 ± 0.0 –21.6 –17.2 –144.8 –3,604.1 +157.2 Nov.
+ 4.6 – 2.1 –171.7 ± 0.0 – 2.2 +31.5 ± 0.0 – 2.9 –44.2 –37.5 –118.2 –89.5 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2023 Jan.
–20.0 – 0.7 –643.8 + 0.1 – 4.0 –469.9 ± 0.0 + 4.8 –119.7 –65.3 –18.2 –483.5 Feb.
–23.6 – 0.3 –70.0 – 0.1 – 3.1 +51.4 ± 0.0 –11.7 +7.4 –139.8 – 4.5 +35.3 Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr.
+28.2 + 0.5 –115.6 + 0.1 –33.4 –106.9 ± 0.0 + 5.9 –19.6 + 8.7 – 8.4 –109.4 May
+ 3.2 + 0.2 –17.2 ± 0.0 –21.5 +130.3 ± 0.0 + 3.9 –104.2 –63.9 – 1.1 +133.1 June
. . . . . . . . . . . . July
–20.4 + 9.3 –418.5 ± 0.0 –31.1 –422.0 ± 0.0 + 3.3 –2.0 –36.1 – 4.2 –422.8 Aug.
– 3.5 – 5.3 –81.0 ± 0.0 –41.8 –57.0 ± 0.0 – 2.8 –31.9 –36.7 – 3.1 –62.9 Sep.
+ 6.9 + 2.5 –85.6 ± 0.0 –43.3 –70.0 ± 0.0 – 9.5 +0.2 –40.5 + 0.3 –79.3 Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov.
+ 2.1 – 0.8 –19.5 – 0.1 –52.9 –28.6 ± 0.0 – 3.6 –28.6 – 8.0 – 2.6 –34.8 Dec.
+25.0 + 0.6 –99.7 + 0.1 –28.2 –61.4 ± 0.0 + 5.6 –25.7 –19.0 – 1.5 –57.3 2024 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
+ 8.2 – 3.1 + 1.1 – 0.1 –40.4 + 3.5 ± 0.0 –13.5 +0.1 –22.5 – 1.9 –11.9 Mar.
+36.3 – 2.0 –147.9 ± 0.0 –46.9 –153.0 ± 0.0 + 2.9 –30.7 +20.5 – 0.2 –150.4 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
+28.9 – 0.3 –100.3 ± 0.0 –48.8 –123.9 ± 0.0 + 5.4 –18.3 +18.0 – 1.7 –120.2 June
+32.0 + 3.2 –44.2 ± 0.0 –56.4 –100.8 ± 0.0 + 8.0 –4.3 +30.4 + 1.4 –91.3 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
Deutsche Bundesbank
. . . . . . . . . . . .2022 Aug.
+ 0.4 + 0.0 – 5.5 – 0.0 – 7.5 +42.7 ± 0.0 –10.8 –57.1 +13.5 – 0.9 +31.0 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
– 0.5 + 0.5 – 3.1 + 0.0 – 5.3 +1,075.5 ± 0.0 – 0.6 –30.7 –69.6 –982.9 +92.0 Nov.
+ 0.7 – 0.4 –48.0 + 0.0 + 7.7 +42.7 ± 0.0 – 0.1 –6.2 –11.0 –65.4 –22.9 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2023 Jan.
– 2.5 – 0.1 –120.6 + 0.1 – 2.4 –112.0 ± 0.0 – 1.6 –43.2 +37.0 – 5.6 –119.3 Feb.
– 1.0 + 0.0 –19.1 – 0.0 + 0.2 +29.1 ± 0.0 – 2.7 –8.6 –37.1 – 0.7 +25.7 Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr.
+10.3 + 0.2 –12.7 + 0.0 –11.0 –35.7 ± 0.0 + 1.2 +4.1 +21.4 – 4.1 –38.5 May
+ 2.6 + 0.1 – 1.3 + 0.0 – 9.3 +28.3 ± 0.0 + 1.4 –18.7 –20.7 + 1.9 +31.5 June
. . . . . . . . . . . . July
– 5.6 + 0.8 –56.5 – 0.0 – 8.0 –80.8 ± 0.0 + 0.4 –4.7 +19.3 – 3.5 –83.9 Aug.
– 1.7 – 0.7 –11.2 + 0.0 – 7.5 + 2.3 ± 0.0 – 0.2 –9.8 –13.0 – 0.4 + 1.6 Sep.
+ 1.2 + 0.5 –35.0 – 0.0 –17.3 –26.7 ± 0.0 – 2.4 –11.5 – 9.9 – 0.0 –29.1 Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov.
+ 1.1 – 0.6 – 7.1 – 0.0 – 7.3 +20.1 ± 0.0 – 1.4 –9.8 –22.3 – 0.7 +18.1 Dec.
+ 7.1 + 0.2 –19.7 + 0.0 –10.9 –44.0 ± 0.0 + 5.8 +0.9 +14.3 – 0.3 –38.5 2024 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
+ 2.6 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 9.0 +37.2 ± 0.0 – 0.2 –3.5 –40.1 – 0.3 +36.7 Mar.
+11.3 + 0.0 –28.9 – 0.0 –13.3 –42.0 ± 0.0 + 0.3 +0.7 +10.9 – 0.8 –42.6 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
+ 8.1 – 0.1 –19.2 – 0.0 –13.4 –19.6 ± 0.0 + 1.5 –3.5 – 3.2 + 0.4 –17.7 June
+ 9.7 + 0.1 – 5.5 + 0.0 –15.7 –10.0 ± 0.0 + 2.0 –1.4 – 1.8 – 0.2 – 8.2 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is shown
under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the euro
banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB
has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other factors”. From 2003 eurobanknotes only.  6 Remaining items in the consolidated financial statement of the Euro-
system and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  7 Equal to the difference bet-
ween the sum of liquidity-pro viding factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors.
8 Calculated as the sum of the “Deposit facility”, “Banknotes in circulation” and “Credit
institutions' current account balances”.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
16•
III.Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets *
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currencyClaims on non-euro area
residents denominated in euro
As at
reporting
dateTotal
assets 
Gold and gold
receivables TotalReceivables
from the IMFBalances with
banks, security
investments,
external loans
and other
external
assetsClaims on
euro area
residents
denominated
in foreign
currency TotalBalances
with banks,
security
investments
and loansClaims
arising from
the credit
facility under
ERM II
Eurosystem 1
2024 Feb. 16 6,842.7 649.1 500.4 229.9 270.5 14.5 15.4 15.4 –
23 6,830.9 649.1 500.8 229.9 270.9 14.6 16.1 16.1 –
Mar. 1 6,820.0 649.1 501.3 229.8 271.5 13.8 15.1 15.1 –
8 6,813.2 649.1 499.9 229.6 270.3 15.1 15.4 15.4 –
15 6,815.6 649.1 501.4 229.6 271.8 13.9 15.6 15.6 –
22 6,810.0 649.1 498.2 229.1 269.1 15.7 15.7 15.7 –
29 6,619.7 711.2 504.7 231.5 273.2 15.1 15.9 15.9 –
Apr. 5 6,585.3 711.2 506.1 231.5 274.7 14.1 15.7 15.7 –
12 6,596.7 711.2 505.5 231.4 274.1 14.9 16.6 16.6 –
19 6,593.2 711.1 505.4 231.3 274.1 14.8 16.2 16.2 –
26 6,598.9 711.1 505.0 231.7 273.3 15.3 16.4 16.4 –
May 3 6,582.1 711.1 505.6 231.6 273.9 15.1 16.6 16.6 –
10 6,581.0 711.1 505.4 232.1 273.2 15.3 16.3 16.3 –
17 6,562.4 711.1 505.7 232.2 273.5 15.1 17.0 17.0 –
24 6,577.7 711.1 506.6 232.2 274.4 14.6 17.7 17.7 –
31 6,560.7 711.1 506.7 232.6 274.2 13.8 16.8 16.8 –
June 7 6,541.6 711.1 507.3 232.6 274.8 14.3 17.2 17.2 –
14 6,534.5 711.1 507.1 232.4 274.7 14.6 16.5 16.5 –
21 6,536.8 711.1 506.1 232.4 273.8 15.5 17.1 17.1 –
28 6,522.0 757.5 510.2 232.4 277.8 14.1 17.0 17.0 –
July 5 6,497.7 757.5 510.2 232.4 277.8 15.0 16.9 16.9 –
12 6,494.5 757.5 510.0 232.4 277.5 15.5 16.7 16.7 –
19 6,478.3 757.5 508.6 232.5 276.2 16.3 17.1 17.1 –
26 6,475.5 757.5 507.0 232.4 274.6 16.3 17.2 17.2 –
Aug. 2 6,468.7 757.5 507.3 232.9 274.4 16.9 17.8 17.8 –
9 6,462.2 757.5 506.8 232.9 273.9 17.3 17.4 17.4 –
16 6,449.2 757.5 507.5 233.2 274.4 17.0 17.1 17.1 –
23 6,459.1 757.5 505.2 233.0 272.2 18.9 17.4 17.4 –
30 6,473.1 757.5 503.6 233.0 270.6 18.7 18.1 18.1 –
Sep. 6 6,456.6 757.5 505.9 233.0 272.9 17.3 18.0 18.0 –
Deutsche Bundesbank
2024 Feb. 16 2,518.7 201.3 91.6 57.8 33.9 0.0 1.4 1.4 –
23 2,500.9 201.3 92.3 57.6 34.7 0.0 1.9 1.9 –
Mar. 1 2,504.7 201.3 92.2 57.5 34.6 0.0 0.9 0.9 –
8 2,496.1 201.3 91.8 57.5 34.3 0.0 1.2 1.2 –
15 2,481.0 201.3 91.8 57.5 34.3 0.0 1.3 1.3 –
22 2,478.2 201.3 91.5 57.5 34.0 0.0 1.1 1.1 –
29 2,447.7 220.6 92.2 57.8 34.3 0.0 0.8 0.8 –
Apr. 5 2,448.6 220.6 91.9 57.8 34.1 0.0 0.8 0.8 –
12 2,439.1 220.6 91.9 57.8 34.1 0.0 1.2 1.2 –
19 2,423.9 220.5 92.6 57.8 34.8 0.0 0.8 0.8 –
26 2,413.4 220.5 92.1 57.8 34.4 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
May 3 2,446.6 220.5 92.1 57.9 34.2 0.0 1.0 1.0 –
10 2,458.4 220.5 92.1 57.9 34.2 0.0 0.6 0.6 –
17 2,442.2 220.5 91.5 57.9 33.6 0.0 1.2 1.2 –
24 2,461.4 220.5 91.7 57.9 33.8 0.0 1.7 1.7 –
31 2,425.5 220.5 92.0 58.2 33.8 0.0 1.0 1.0 –
June 7 2,439.1 220.5 92.2 58.2 34.0 0.0 0.9 0.9 –
14 2,420.5 220.5 92.4 58.2 34.2 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
21 2,436.8 220.5 92.4 58.2 34.2 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
28 2,447.3 234.9 93.3 58.2 35.1 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
July 5 2,466.7 234.9 93.2 58.1 35.1 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
12 2,462.3 234.9 92.8 58.1 34.7 0.0 0.3 0.3 –
19 2,418.0 234.9 92.6 58.1 34.5 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
26 2,416.5 234.9 92.3 58.1 34.2 0.0 0.3 0.3 –
Aug. 2 2,425.8 234.9 92.2 58.2 34.0 0.0 1.0 1.0 –
9 2,409.2 234.9 92.1 58.2 33.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 –
16 2,413.9 234.9 92.1 58.2 33.9 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
23 2,384.9 234.9 92.1 58.2 33.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 –
30 2,419.4 234.9 91.6 58.2 33.4 0.0 0.8 0.8 –
Sep. 6 2,395.3 234.9 91.5 58.2 33.3 0.0 0.9 0.9 –
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet itemsfor foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the end of
the quarter.  1 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
17•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euroSecurities of euro area residents
in euro
TotalMain re-
financing
opera-
tionsLonger-
term re-
financing
opera-
tionsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsStructural
reverse
opera-
tionsMarginal
lending
facility 
 
 
 
Credits
related
to margin
callsOther
claims on
euro area
credit
institutions
denomi-
nated in
euro TotalSecurities
held for
monetary
policy
purposesOther
securitiesGeneral
government
debt deno-
minated in
euroOther
assetsAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 1
401.3 4.3 396.9 – – 0.0 – 20.4 4,848.7 4,646.7 202.0 20.9 372.0 2024 Feb. 16
401.5 4.5 396.9 – – 0.0 – 26.6 4,847.3 4,644.6 202.7 20.9 354.1 23
403.4 5.3 398.0 – – 0.0 – 37.2 4,830.7 4,628.7 202.0 20.9 348.5 Mar. 1
401.6 3.6 398.0 – – – – 23.7 4,832.7 4,630.1 202.5 20.9 354.8 8
400.4 2.4 398.0 – – – – 27.9 4,829.7 4,624.7 204.9 20.9 356.8 15
400.0 2.0 398.0 – – – – 35.1 4,824.3 4,618.1 206.2 20.9 350.9 22
156.2 5.9 150.3 – – – – 34.4 4,802.6 4,595.0 207.6 20.8 358.7 29
152.5 2.2 150.3 – – – – 23.0 4,789.3 4,579.4 209.9 20.8 352.5 Apr. 5
151.7 1.4 150.3 – – – – 21.7 4,795.6 4,582.8 212.8 20.8 358.6 12
151.9 1.6 150.3 – – 0.0 – 24.5 4,786.6 4,571.4 215.1 20.8 361.8 19
154.8 4.5 150.3 – – 0.0 – 26.7 4,788.5 4,572.6 215.9 20.8 360.2 26
151.4 2.0 149.4 – – – – 27.1 4,777.4 4,562.2 215.2 20.8 356.8 May 3
151.1 1.7 149.4 – – – – 21.7 4,782.2 4,566.6 215.6 20.8 357.0 10
150.6 1.2 149.4 – – – – 20.0 4,763.2 4,547.2 216.0 20.8 358.7 17
150.8 1.3 149.4 – – – – 26.2 4,765.5 4,548.2 217.4 20.8 364.3 24
152.0 4.9 147.1 – – – – 35.4 4,740.1 4,522.4 217.7 20.8 363.9 31
149.5 2.3 147.1 – – – – 28.0 4,739.7 4,521.4 218.3 20.8 353.7 June 7
149.3 2.2 147.1 – – – – 26.9 4,732.4 4,513.3 219.1 20.8 355.8 14
151.4 4.3 147.1 – – – – 33.9 4,729.6 4,510.5 219.1 20.8 351.2 21
95.0 11.1 83.8 – – 0.1 – 32.5 4,714.7 4,496.0 218.7 20.8 360.1 28
90.6 6.7 83.8 – – 0.1 – 28.4 4,707.1 4,489.0 218.1 20.8 351.2 July 5
89.2 5.3 83.8 – – 0.0 – 22.3 4,707.3 4,488.7 218.6 20.8 355.1 12
88.5 4.7 83.8 – – – – 20.1 4,691.8 4,472.5 219.3 20.8 357.5 19
88.2 4.4 83.8 – – – – 24.4 4,685.6 4,465.5 220.0 20.8 358.4 26
90.8 5.5 85.4 – – – – 34.0 4,675.3 4,454.8 220.5 20.8 348.2 Aug. 2
87.1 1.8 85.4 – – – – 27.9 4,675.6 4,455.3 220.3 20.8 351.7 9
87.2 1.9 85.4 – – – – 29.8 4,658.2 4,438.9 219.2 20.8 354.0 16
88.2 2.9 85.4 – – 0.0 – 29.8 4,658.4 4,438.6 219.8 20.8 362.9 23
90.2 4.0 86.2 – – – – 35.8 4,657.0 4,436.3 220.7 20.8 371.3 30
88.1 1.8 86.2 – – – – 36.3 4,649.0 4,427.9 221.0 20.8 363.7 Sep. 6
Deutsche Bundesbank
69.9 0.5 69.3 – – 0.0 – 5.5 994.2 994.2 – 4.4 1,150.3 2024 Feb. 16
70.1 0.7 69.3 – – 0.0 – 9.2 992.7 992.7 – 4.4 1,129.0 23
70.4 1.1 69.3 – – 0.0 – 10.8 993.3 993.3 – 4.4 1,131.4 Mar. 1
69.9 0.6 69.3 – – – – 10.1 994.0 994.0 – 4.4 1,123.4 8
69.8 0.4 69.3 – – – – 10.1 989.1 989.1 – 4.4 1,113.2 15
69.8 0.5 69.3 – – – – 11.9 987.7 987.7 – 4.4 1,110.4 22
22.8 1.6 21.2 – – – – 13.0 987.0 987.0 – 4.4 1,107.0 29
21.7 0.5 21.2 – – – – 8.8 974.4 974.4 – 4.4 1,125.9 Apr. 5
21.6 0.4 21.2 – – – – 9.1 975.0 975.0 – 4.4 1,115.2 12
21.6 0.4 21.2 – – 0.0 – 9.9 973.4 973.4 – 4.4 1,100.7 19
22.3 1.1 21.2 – – 0.0 – 11.6 974.8 974.8 – 4.4 1,087.3 26
21.8 0.5 21.3 – – – – 11.7 975.7 975.7 – 4.4 1,119.3 May 3
21.6 0.3 21.3 – – – – 8.4 977.3 977.3 – 4.4 1,133.4 10
21.6 0.3 21.3 – – – – 7.0 964.3 964.3 – 4.4 1,131.7 17
21.7 0.4 21.3 – – – – 11.1 965.0 965.0 – 4.4 1,145.3 24
22.4 1.1 21.3 – – – – 11.2 965.8 965.8 – 4.4 1,108.2 31
21.7 0.4 21.3 – – – – 11.0 965.1 965.1 – 4.4 1,123.3 June 7
21.7 0.4 21.3 – – – – 11.3 957.2 957.2 – 4.4 1,112.9 14
21.7 0.4 21.3 – – – – 11.3 955.5 955.5 – 4.4 1,130.6 21
14.5 1.5 13.0 – – – – 10.4 955.5 955.5 – 4.4 1,133.9 28
13.7 0.6 13.0 – – 0.1 – 9.9 953.3 953.3 – 4.4 1,156.9 July 5
13.7 0.8 13.0 – – 0.0 – 9.4 952.0 952.0 – 4.4 1,154.7 12
13.5 0.5 13.0 – – – – 6.1 950.5 950.5 – 4.4 1,115.6 19
13.6 0.6 13.0 – – – – 8.8 950.7 950.7 – 4.4 1,111.3 26
14.2 1.0 13.2 – – – – 12.3 949.9 949.9 – 4.4 1,116.9 Aug. 2
13.6 0.4 13.2 – – – – 11.5 950.0 950.0 – 4.4 1,102.5 9
13.8 0.5 13.2 – – – – 11.2 940.5 940.5 – 4.4 1,116.9 16
13.8 0.6 13.2 – – 0.0 – 12.8 939.8 939.8 – 4.4 1,086.8 23
14.5 0.9 13.6 – – – – 13.0 939.5 939.5 – 4.4 1,120.6 30
14.0 0.4 13.6 – – – – 13.6 939.3 939.3 – 4.4 1,096.8 Sep. 6

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
18•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
2. Liabilities *
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to
monetary policy operations denominated in euroLiabilities to
other euro area residents
denominated in euro
As at
reporting
date 
Total
liabilitiesBanknotes
in circu-
lation  1 TotalCurrent
accounts
(covering
the
minimum
reserve
system)Deposit
facilityFixed-
term
depositsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsDeposits
related to
margin
callsOther
liabilities
to euro 
area credit
institutions
deno-
minated
in euroDebt
certifi-
cates
issued TotalGeneral
govern-
mentOther
liabilities
Eurosystem 3
2024 Feb. 16 6,842.7 1,543.3 3,640.2 153.9 3,486.2 – – 0.0 32.0 – 264.3 187.4 76.9
23 6,830.9 1,541.7 3,678.6 154.5 3,524.0 – – 0.0 31.7 – 231.0 155.4 75.6
Mar. 1 6,820.0 1,542.7 3,657.1 163.1 3,493.9 – – 0.0 33.3 – 228.4 150.6 77.8
8 6,813.2 1,543.4 3,662.1 198.0 3,464.1 – – 0.0 33.1 – 229.9 148.2 81.6
15 6,815.6 1,542.9 3,660.0 156.3 3,503.8 – – 0.0 35.1 – 234.2 149.3 84.9
22 6,810.0 1,543.8 3,675.2 150.7 3,524.5 – – 0.0 35.6 – 212.3 135.2 77.1
29 6,619.7 1,550.3 3,379.5 169.7 3,209.8 – – 0.0 37.5 – 226.1 142.6 83.6
Apr. 5 6,585.3 1,547.8 3,392.0 161.7 3,230.3 – – 0.0 33.3 – 219.1 140.7 78.3
12 6,596.7 1,546.4 3,416.7 185.5 3,231.2 – – 0.0 31.3 – 205.3 127.0 78.3
19 6,593.2 1,546.2 3,415.2 170.0 3,245.2 – – 0.0 31.9 – 201.1 119.4 81.7
26 6,598.9 1,548.6 3,416.3 153.7 3,262.6 – – 0.0 32.1 – 204.7 123.9 80.8
May 3 6,582.1 1,553.2 3,391.0 153.2 3,237.9 – – 0.0 32.9 – 197.5 118.3 79.3
10 6,581.0 1,553.3 3,399.0 152.6 3,246.3 – – 0.0 31.9 – 194.3 115.1 79.2
17 6,562.4 1,552.9 3,376.8 152.0 3,224.8 – – 0.0 32.4 – 195.9 117.3 78.6
24 6,577.7 1,551.2 3,372.8 151.9 3,220.9 – – 0.0 33.7 – 201.7 120.2 81.5
31 6,560.7 1,553.4 3,322.2 168.7 3,153.5 – – 0.0 36.3 – 210.6 131.8 78.8
June 7 6,541.6 1,553.8 3,350.0 196.9 3,153.1 – – – 33.4 – 199.9 106.1 93.9
14 6,534.5 1,554.2 3,351.7 173.7 3,177.9 – – – 32.9 – 185.9 107.6 78.3
21 6,536.8 1,555.7 3,345.0 152.3 3,192.8 – – – 33.3 – 188.6 111.8 76.8
28 6,522.0 1,559.9 3,237.5 170.2 3,067.3 – – – 36.1 – 205.1 125.7 79.4
July 5 6,497.7 1,562.2 3,255.2 160.8 3,094.3 – – – 33.7 – 193.3 115.9 77.4
12 6,494.5 1,563.0 3,260.4 154.0 3,106.4 – – – 32.8 – 195.3 117.7 77.7
19 6,478.3 1,563.4 3,223.4 192.3 3,031.2 – – – 32.1 – 202.8 125.0 77.8
26 6,475.5 1,564.1 3,218.5 186.4 3,032.1 – – – 32.6 – 211.8 132.6 79.3
Aug. 2 6,468.7 1,566.1 3,224.7 159.7 3,065.1 – – 0.0 35.4 – 199.5 119.9 79.6
9 6,462.2 1,567.1 3,244.2 157.0 3,087.2 – – 0.0 33.8 – 192.5 114.3 78.2
16 6,449.2 1,567.2 3,232.9 155.0 3,077.9 – – 0.0 32.7 – 186.5 110.4 76.1
23 6,459.1 1,563.3 3,232.8 156.0 3,076.8 – – – 33.7 – 192.8 116.3 76.5
30 6,473.1 1,563.1 3,205.7 167.3 3,038.4 – – – 32.8 – 214.8 137.8 77.0
Sep. 6 6,456.6 1,562.6 3,216.5 155.6 3,060.9 – – – 34.9 – 207.2 123.4 83.8
Deutsche Bundesbank
2024 Feb. 16 2,518.7 379.8 1,214.8 40.4 1,174.4 – – 0.0 5.2 – 31.9 20.6 11.3
23 2,500.9 379.4 1,221.1 40.6 1,180.5 – – 0.0 5.2 – 26.0 15.2 10.8
Mar. 1 2,504.7 378.1 1,225.2 43.1 1,182.1 – – 0.0 5.2 – 27.5 16.2 11.3
8 2,496.1 379.0 1,219.4 60.4 1,159.0 – – 0.0 5.3 – 25.1 13.1 12.0
15 2,481.0 379.0 1,204.6 45.3 1,159.3 – – 0.0 6.7 – 26.6 15.1 11.5
22 2,478.2 379.6 1,198.2 40.0 1,158.1 – – 0.0 6.7 – 26.0 15.1 10.9
29 2,447.7 379.8 1,141.0 45.0 1,095.9 – – 0.0 8.3 – 29.1 16.0 13.1
Apr. 5 2,448.6 379.2 1,154.1 40.4 1,113.7 – – 0.0 6.8 – 29.2 18.0 11.3
12 2,439.1 379.3 1,146.2 58.0 1,088.1 – – 0.0 5.4 – 31.8 20.1 11.6
19 2,423.9 379.6 1,131.7 43.8 1,087.8 – – 0.0 5.1 – 28.2 15.5 12.7
26 2,413.4 380.5 1,119.4 40.6 1,078.8 – – 0.0 5.4 – 31.0 19.9 11.1
May 3 2,446.6 380.8 1,160.5 41.9 1,118.6 – – 0.0 5.4 – 23.8 11.9 11.9
10 2,458.4 381.6 1,171.6 39.5 1,132.0 – – 0.0 4.9 – 22.9 12.0 10.9
17 2,442.2 382.2 1,151.9 38.5 1,113.4 – – 0.0 4.6 – 23.3 11.7 11.6
24 2,461.4 381.5 1,169.8 38.3 1,131.4 – – 0.0 4.6 – 24.3 11.7 12.6
31 2,425.5 380.6 1,122.8 43.4 1,079.5 – – 0.0 5.5 – 29.5 16.9 12.6
June 7 2,439.1 380.9 1,149.7 63.1 1,086.6 – – – 5.1 – 22.9 11.8 11.2
14 2,420.5 381.3 1,122.6 44.6 1,078.0 – – – 4.9 – 23.0 11.3 11.7
21 2,436.8 381.8 1,138.0 40.7 1,097.4 – – – 5.1 – 25.7 14.2 11.5
28 2,447.3 382.2 1,124.4 45.5 1,078.9 – – – 6.1 – 25.2 11.8 13.4
July 5 2,466.7 383.4 1,157.9 41.1 1,116.8 – – – 4.5 – 24.4 12.5 11.9
12 2,462.3 384.3 1,157.1 39.8 1,117.2 – – – 4.0 – 23.2 11.7 11.5
19 2,418.0 384.9 1,117.6 63.0 1,054.6 – – – 3.2 – 21.9 10.1 11.8
26 2,416.5 385.4 1,112.9 45.0 1,067.9 – – – 3.1 – 22.2 10.2 12.0
Aug. 2 2,425.8 384.2 1,116.4 44.7 1,071.7 – – 0.0 4.9 – 22.0 8.9 13.1
9 2,409.2 385.1 1,099.6 40.7 1,058.9 – – 0.0 4.9 – 22.1 9.8 12.3
16 2,413.9 385.2 1,096.8 40.2 1,056.6 – – 0.0 4.2 – 21.7 9.4 12.3
23 2,384.9 385.4 1,064.4 39.2 1,025.2 – – – 5.1 – 23.5 10.9 12.6
30 2,419.4 383.0 1,090.4 45.6 1,044.9 – – – 4.8 – 26.2 13.6 12.6
Sep. 6 2,395.3 383.8 1,070.3 40.0 1,030.2 – – – 5.9 – 28.9 16.9 12.0
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet items
for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at marketrates at the end of the quarrter.  1 In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen
by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of
the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthy basis. The
counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an "Intra-Eurosystem liability related to

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
19•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Liabilities
to non-euro
area residents
denominated
in euroLiabilities
to euro area
residents
in foreign
currency TotalDeposits,
balances
and other
liabilitiesLiabilities
arising
from the
credit facility
under ERM IICounterpart
of special
drawing
rights allocated
by the IMFOther
liabilities  2Intra-
Eurosystem
liability
related to
euro
banknote
issue  1 
 
 
 
 
Revaluation
accountsCapital
and
reservesAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 3
187.0 17.5 2.9 2.9 – 177.1 235.8 – 634.9 107.6 2024 Feb. 16
190.6 17.4 3.7 3.7 – 177.1 218.9 – 634.9 105.2 23
197.2 16.8 4.4 4.4 – 177.1 222.8 – 634.9 105.3 Mar. 1
191.6 17.0 3.6 3.6 – 177.1 215.2 – 634.9 105.3 8
189.1 17.1 3.9 3.9 – 177.1 215.9 – 634.9 105.3 15
188.1 16.4 4.9 4.9 – 177.1 216.4 – 634.9 105.3 22
199.5 15.9 6.4 6.4 – 178.5 221.8 – 702.9 101.1 29
180.9 16.2 5.2 5.2 – 178.5 208.4 – 702.9 101.1 Apr. 5
183.7 16.6 5.7 5.7 – 178.5 208.4 – 702.9 101.1 12
184.4 15.6 6.6 6.6 – 178.5 210.7 – 702.9 100.0 19
183.6 15.5 7.2 7.2 – 178.5 209.6 – 702.9 99.9 26
196.6 15.6 6.4 6.4 – 178.5 207.5 – 702.9 99.9 May 3
194.5 14.7 6.6 6.6 – 178.5 205.4 – 702.9 99.7 10
195.7 14.9 6.4 6.4 – 178.5 206.3 – 702.9 99.7 17
203.6 15.0 6.8 6.8 – 178.5 211.8 – 702.9 99.7 24
218.9 13.8 6.7 6.7 – 178.5 217.6 – 702.9 99.7 31
195.6 14.6 6.7 6.7 – 178.5 206.4 – 702.9 99.7 June 7
202.7 15.0 6.7 6.7 – 178.5 204.4 – 702.9 99.7 14
206.0 15.3 5.0 5.0 – 178.5 206.7 – 702.9 99.7 21
221.8 15.0 5.3 5.3 – 179.0 212.1 – 750.4 99.7 28
200.8 15.8 5.7 5.7 – 179.0 201.9 – 750.4 99.7 July 5
191.2 16.2 5.2 5.2 – 179.0 201.3 – 750.4 99.7 12
202.6 16.4 4.6 4.6 – 179.0 203.8 – 750.4 99.7 19
194.4 15.5 4.1 4.1 – 179.0 205.5 – 750.4 99.7 26
192.3 15.7 4.0 4.0 – 179.0 201.9 – 750.4 99.6 Aug. 2
175.6 15.7 3.6 3.6 – 179.0 200.7 – 750.4 99.6 9
178.1 15.6 2.6 2.6 – 179.0 204.6 – 750.4 99.6 16
180.4 15.5 2.1 2.1 – 179.0 209.5 – 750.4 99.6 23
191.9 14.8 2.4 2.4 – 179.0 218.4 – 750.4 99.6 30
176.3 15.7 2.2 2.2 – 179.0 212.1 – 750.4 99.6 Sep. 6
Deutsche Bundesbank
61.9 0.0 1.0 1.0 – 45.7 39.5 536.2 197.1 5.5 2024 Feb. 16
63.9 0.0 1.5 1.5 – 45.7 21.5 536.2 197.1 3.2 23
61.4 0.0 1.3 1.3 – 45.7 21.4 538.6 197.1 3.2 Mar. 1
60.6 0.0 0.7 0.7 – 45.7 21.4 538.6 197.1 3.2 8
57.3 0.0 0.7 0.7 – 45.7 21.6 538.6 197.1 3.2 15
60.9 0.0 0.5 0.5 – 45.7 21.8 538.6 197.1 3.2 22
61.2 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 46.1 20.5 541.5 216.6 3.2 29
50.9 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 46.1 20.6 541.5 216.6 3.2 Apr. 5
47.7 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 46.1 20.9 541.5 216.6 3.2 12
50.0 0.0 1.1 1.1 – 46.1 20.9 541.5 216.6 3.2 19
48.0 0.0 0.7 0.7 – 46.1 21.0 541.5 216.6 3.2 26
46.0 0.0 0.5 0.5 – 46.1 20.4 543.3 216.6 3.2 May 3
47.3 0.0 0.5 0.5 – 46.1 20.5 543.3 216.6 3.2 10
49.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 46.1 21.9 543.3 216.6 3.2 17
50.1 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 46.1 21.5 543.3 216.6 3.2 24
53.6 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 46.1 21.5 545.7 216.6 3.2 31
46.8 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 46.1 21.7 545.7 216.6 3.2 June 7
55.0 0.0 0.5 0.5 – 46.1 21.9 545.7 216.6 3.2 14
52.5 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 46.1 22.0 545.7 216.6 3.2 21
61.5 0.0 0.6 0.6 – 46.2 19.5 547.3 231.1 3.2 28
49.0 0.0 0.6 0.6 – 46.2 19.2 547.3 231.1 3.2 July 5
46.4 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 46.2 19.3 547.3 231.1 3.2 12
43.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.2 19.4 547.3 231.1 3.2 19
45.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.2 19.7 547.3 231.1 3.2 26
48.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.2 19.0 550.2 231.1 3.2 Aug. 2
47.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.2 19.1 550.2 231.1 3.2 9
55.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.2 19.8 550.2 231.1 3.2 16
56.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.2 19.8 550.2 231.1 3.2 23
59.2 0.0 0.5 0.5 – 46.2 20.4 554.4 231.1 3.2 30
51.0 0.0 0.3 0.3 – 46.2 20.4 554.4 231.1 3.2 Sep. 6
euro banknote issue". The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on an monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the eurobanknotes allocated to the NCB according to the aforementioned accounting
procedure and the value of euro banknotes put into circulation is also disclosed as an
"Intra-Eurosystem claim/liability related to banknote issue".  2 For the Deutsche Bundes-
bank: including DEM banknotes still in circulation.  3 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
20•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Assets
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the 
to banks in the home country to banks in other Member States to non-banks in the home country 
Enterprises and house- 
holds   
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1Cash
in hand Total Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Total Total Loans
End of year or month 
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2018 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2019 8,311.0 43.4 2,230.1 1,759.8 1,493.5 266.3 470.4 327.6 142.8 4,020.1 3,584.9 3,168.7 2,864.9
2020 8,943.3 47.5 2,622.7 2,177.9 1,913.5 264.4 444.8 307.1 137.7 4,179.6 3,709.8 3,297.0 2,993.1
2021 9,172.2 49.7 2,789.6 2,333.0 2,069.6 263.4 456.6 324.4 132.2 4,350.4 3,860.4 3,468.8 3,147.6
2022 10,517.9 20.0 2,935.2 2,432.2 2,169.2 263.0 502.9 359.6 143.3 4,584.6 4,079.3 3,702.9 3,365.4
2023 10,321.0 18.7 2,884.4 2,349.7 2,081.8 267.9 534.7 374.6 160.1 4,651.2 4,109.2 3,729.7 3,395.7
2022 Oct. 11,036.0 20.0 3,259.8 2,696.8 2,424.2 272.6 563.0 416.3 146.7 4,591.1 4,077.8 3,699.7 3,365.9
Nov. 10,762.4 19.1 3,180.1 2,630.6 2,360.1 270.5 549.5 403.2 146.2 4,610.5 4,089.4 3,715.1 3,379.3
Dec. 10,517.9 20.0 2,935.2 2,432.2 2,169.2 263.0 502.9 359.6 143.3 4,584.6 4,079.3 3,702.9 3,365.4
2023 Jan. 10,585.0 18.2 3,085.7 2,550.5 2,288.2 262.3 535.1 383.8 151.4 4,600.1 4,080.1 3,706.1 3,372.3
Feb. 10,760.9 18.0 3,085.7 2,541.4 2,274.9 266.5 544.3 390.6 153.8 4,614.2 4,094.2 3,714.7 3,381.3
Mar. 10,553.8 17.9 3,041.3 2,497.8 2,229.3 268.4 543.5 391.2 152.3 4,620.6 4,094.7 3,718.2 3,386.0
Apr. 10,564.3 18.9 3,047.7 2,507.0 2,237.3 269.7 540.7 384.5 156.2 4,630.5 4,096.8 3,721.7 3,390.4
May 10,653.7 18.2 3,091.2 2,550.3 2,279.7 270.6 541.0 383.4 157.5 4,642.2 4,103.4 3,733.0 3,400.9
June 10,577.7 17.7 2,967.0 2,434.5 2,166.3 268.2 532.5 371.5 161.0 4,646.7 4,108.0 3,734.5 3,397.1
July 10,743.2 17.2 3,002.4 2,456.4 2,188.8 267.6 546.0 384.8 161.2 4,651.1 4,114.5 3,738.2 3,402.0
Aug. 10,735.3 17.5 2,994.8 2,455.6 2,187.1 268.4 539.2 377.9 161.4 4,649.4 4,111.7 3,733.9 3,400.6
Sep. 10,737.5 18.0 2,916.4 2,371.6 2,106.3 265.3 544.8 382.8 162.0 4,649.8 4,113.1 3,735.7 3,401.7
Oct. 10,797.9 17.5 2,980.6 2,430.9 2,165.6 265.3 549.7 387.7 162.1 4,653.7 4,116.8 3,736.3 3,401.6
Nov. 10,610.8 16.9 2,987.1 2,438.4 2,168.4 270.0 548.7 386.5 162.2 4,666.3 4,123.1 3,740.9 3,406.9
Dec. 10,321.0 18.7 2,884.4 2,349.7 2,081.8 267.9 534.7 374.6 160.1 4,651.2 4,109.2 3,729.7 3,395.7
2024 Jan. 10,454.3 16.3 2,979.1 2,420.8 2,144.5 276.3 558.2 394.5 163.7 4,665.4 4,113.3 3,729.2 3,393.3
Feb. 10,584.8 16.3 3,012.3 2,441.5 2,160.1 281.4 570.8 406.8 163.9 4,675.8 4,120.6 3,736.2 3,399.3
Mar. 10,509.6 17.6 2,957.6 2,389.6 2,105.8 283.8 568.1 403.0 165.1 4,695.4 4,126.2 3,741.0 3,401.3
Apr. 10,598.5 16.6 2,959.3 2,382.9 2,097.2 285.7 576.4 412.6 163.8 4,690.1 4,127.5 3,741.6 3,402.0
May 10,578.7 16.7 2,951.3 2,378.9 2,092.4 286.5 572.4 406.9 165.5 4,701.4 4,135.1 3,747.0 3,406.5
June 10,491.1 16.7 2,936.5 2,378.3 2,093.0 285.3 558.2 393.5 164.7 4,712.0 4,142.7 3,747.5 3,408.4
July 10,314.1 16.3 2,892.6 2,328.3 2,041.8 286.5 564.3 398.4 165.9 4,715.5 4,153.1 3,756.1 3,413.9
Changes 3
2015 –191.4 0.3 –18.2 –12.1 66.1 –78.2 – 6.1 6.6 –12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 –16.8 –58.1 – 49.2 – 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.0
2017 8.0 6.1 135.9 165.0 182.6 –17.6 –29.1 – 19.6 – 9.5 51.3 63.5 114.8 101.1
2018 101.8 8.5 –29.2 –49.7 –53.4 3.7 20.6 13.0 7.6 78.7 71.9 118.1 127.8
2019 483.4 2.8 20.7 – 3.8 – 2.3 – 1.5 24.5 16.9 7.5 161.8 130.5 148.2 140.9
2020 769.5 4.1 505.4 524.2 512.6 11.6 –18.8 – 16.2 – 2.6 161.0 130.0 132.3 132.2
2021 207.2 2.2 161.3 155.6 156.4 – 0.8 5.7 11.7 – 5.9 175.7 154.6 173.7 155.9
2022 1,170.5 –29.7 149.5 103.7 100.5 3.2 45.8 33.1 12.7 242.4 223.1 237.5 220.6
2023 –133.8 – 1.3 –41.5 –76.2 –86.2 10.0 34.7 17.2 17.5 84.5 44.6 40.5 41.3
2022 Nov. –245.9 – 0.9 –75.9 –65.0 –63.0 – 2.0 –10.9 – 10.5 – 0.5 21.4 13.0 17.1 15.1
Dec. –225.1 0.9 –240.0 –196.2 –189.2 – 7.1 –43.8 – 41.2 – 2.6 –24.0 – 8.4 – 9.9 –11.6
2023 Jan. 87.5 – 1.8 155.0 122.2 119.3 2.8 32.8 24.0 8.9 22.8 6.5 8.1 8.0
Feb. 167.0 – 0.2 – 0.8 – 9.1 –13.4 4.3 8.3 5.8 2.5 13.4 13.6 7.9 8.3
Mar. –195.2 – 0.1 –42.8 –43.2 –45.0 1.8 0.4 1.9 – 1.5 8.2 2.0 5.0 6.2
Apr. 16.7 1.0 7.7 9.8 8.1 1.7 – 2.1 – 6.0 3.9 11.0 3.0 4.2 5.1
May 91.9 – 0.7 41.9 42.2 41.3 0.9 – 0.2 – 1.6 1.3 12.3 6.8 11.5 10.6
June –65.9 – 0.5 –121.0 –113.5 –112.5 – 1.1 – 7.5 – 11.0 3.5 4.7 5.5 2.5 – 1.7
July 170.6 – 0.5 34.6 22.2 22.7 – 0.6 12.4 12.2 0.2 6.0 7.6 4.7 5.8
Aug. –15.1 0.3 – 7.6 – 1.1 – 1.9 0.8 – 6.5 – 6.6 0.1 – 0.5 – 2.4 – 3.9 – 1.0
Sep. 1.6 0.6 –78.5 –83.9 –80.8 – 3.1 5.3 4.7 0.7 1.6 2.3 2.7 2.0
Oct. 68.3 – 0.5 64.7 59.5 59.5 0.0 5.1 5.1 0.1 5.1 4.6 1.5 0.9
Nov. –174.8 – 0.6 8.2 7.9 3.2 4.7 0.3 0.3 0.0 13.7 7.3 6.4 7.2
Dec. –286.4 1.8 –102.9 –89.1 –86.8 – 2.3 –13.8 – 11.6 – 2.2 –13.7 –12.3 –10.1 –10.1
2024 Jan. 123.8 – 2.4 90.9 68.6 61.1 7.6 22.3 18.9 3.3 15.1 5.4 0.8 0.1
Feb. 132.1 0.0 33.5 20.9 15.7 5.3 12.5 12.3 0.2 11.2 7.4 7.3 6.3
Mar. –75.2 1.3 –55.0 –52.0 –54.3 2.4 – 3.0 – 3.9 0.9 20.1 6.2 5.5 2.8
Apr. 86.9 – 1.1 1.5 – 6.7 – 8.6 1.9 8.2 9.2 – 1.1 – 3.8 1.9 1.4 1.2
May –11.7 0.2 – 7.0 – 3.7 – 4.6 0.9 – 3.3 – 5.0 1.7 12.5 8.4 6.3 5.5
June –95.0 – 0.0 –16.0 – 1.1 1.0 – 2.1 –14.9 – 14.2 – 0.6 11.0 7.9 0.8 2.1
July –176.7 – 0.4 –44.6 –50.1 –51.2 1.1 5.5 4.9 0.6 4.9 11.6 9.9 6.8
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.  1 See
footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
21•
IV. Banks
euro area
to non-banks in other Member States 
Claims on non-euro area
residents
 
  
General governmentEnterprises and
households 
General government
 
Securities Total Loans 
Securities  2Total Totalof which:
Loans Total Loans 
Securities Totalof which:
LoansOther
assets  1 Period
End of year or month
276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016
308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 2017
297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2 2018
303.8 416.2 254.7 161.6 435.2 312.6 199.0 122.6 29.4 93.2 1,035.8 777.5 981.5 2019
303.9 412.8 252.3 160.5 469.8 327.5 222.2 142.3 29.7 112.7 1,003.2 751.2 1,090.3 2020
321.2 391.6 245.1 146.5 490.1 362.7 244.0 127.4 28.4 99.0 1,094.2 853.3 888.3 2021
337.5 376.4 248.0 128.4 505.3 384.9 270.2 120.4 30.8 89.6 1,137.2 882.9 1,841.0 2022
334.0 379.5 254.3 125.2 542.0 411.1 283.5 130.9 28.4 102.5 1,134.5 876.1 1,632.3 2023
333.8 378.1 246.0 132.1 513.3 385.7 268.4 127.6 34.4 93.2 1,234.2 975.7 1,930.8 2022 Oct.
335.9 374.2 246.3 127.9 521.1 394.0 276.5 127.1 32.7 94.4 1,224.6 963.4 1,728.1 Nov.
337.5 376.4 248.0 128.4 505.3 384.9 270.2 120.4 30.8 89.6 1,137.2 882.9 1,841.0 Dec.
333.8 374.0 250.3 123.7 520.1 393.5 280.2 126.6 30.2 96.4 1,161.9 904.0 1,719.2 2023 Jan.
333.5 379.5 248.2 131.3 520.0 393.3 279.2 126.8 31.3 95.4 1,167.6 904.4 1,875.3 Feb.
332.2 376.5 248.9 127.6 526.0 397.5 275.7 128.4 30.9 97.5 1,168.5 902.6 1,705.4 Mar.
331.2 375.1 250.9 124.2 533.7 405.8 280.9 128.0 32.3 95.7 1,149.9 883.9 1,717.3 Apr.
332.1 370.5 249.8 120.7 538.7 407.7 284.6 131.0 31.9 99.1 1,177.7 912.0 1,724.4 May
337.4 373.4 248.7 124.7 538.7 403.1 279.6 135.6 31.0 104.5 1,150.6 886.7 1,795.7 June
336.2 376.4 252.1 124.3 536.6 407.3 282.8 129.3 30.7 98.7 1,156.3 895.0 1,916.3 July
333.3 377.9 249.5 128.4 537.7 404.5 282.9 133.2 31.1 102.1 1,157.7 899.2 1,915.9 Aug.
334.1 377.4 252.0 125.4 536.7 404.7 282.5 132.0 32.0 100.0 1,163.8 902.7 1,989.5 Sep.
334.7 380.5 255.1 125.4 537.0 405.6 282.9 131.4 32.0 99.4 1,165.8 909.5 1,980.1 Oct.
334.0 382.2 254.4 127.8 543.2 412.1 288.2 131.1 30.9 100.2 1,153.0 895.0 1,787.6 Nov.
334.0 379.5 254.3 125.2 542.0 411.1 283.5 130.9 28.4 102.5 1,134.5 876.1 1,632.3 Dec.
335.9 384.2 256.3 127.9 552.0 414.9 287.1 137.1 28.8 108.3 1,167.8 911.4 1,625.8 2024 Jan.
336.9 384.5 254.8 129.6 555.2 420.3 293.8 134.9 28.5 106.4 1,205.6 942.8 1,674.7 Feb.
339.7 385.2 257.2 128.0 569.2 426.8 294.6 142.5 28.1 114.4 1,211.2 942.8 1,627.7 Mar.
339.7 385.8 259.9 126.0 562.7 422.4 294.1 140.3 28.8 111.4 1,218.9 947.8 1,713.6 Apr.
340.5 388.1 259.6 128.5 566.3 429.9 296.6 136.4 27.8 108.6 1,247.8 977.8 1,661.5 May
339.0 395.2 262.6 132.7 569.3 425.5 293.2 143.8 28.0 115.8 1,237.3 963.9 1,588.6 June
342.2 397.0 263.1 133.9 562.5 418.8 296.3 143.7 27.5 116.2 1,237.8 956.7 1,451.8 July
Changes 3
11.5 – 3.9 – 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 – 3.7 – 1.0 – 2.8 –88.3 –101.0 –150.1 2015
7.8 –35.4 –12.1 –23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 – 4.2 – 0.9 – 3.3 51.4 55.0 –51.4 2016
13.7 –51.3 –22.8 –28.5 –12.2 – 3.4 4.0 – 8.7 0.1 – 8.9 –12.3 – 6.7 –173.1 2017
– 9.8 –46.2 –19.1 –27.0 6.8 18.2 18.6 –11.4 – 1.5 – 9.9 29.0 18.9 14.8 2018
7.3 –17.7 – 8.6 – 9.1 31.3 29.5 26.9 1.7 0.0 1.7 –32.1 –33.3 330.3 2019
0.2 – 2.4 – 1.7 – 0.7 31.0 30.6 20.9 0.3 – 0.4 0.7 – 9.7 – 8.2 108.8 2020
17.8 –19.1 – 6.1 –13.1 21.1 35.5 22.6 –14.3 – 1.1 –13.2 71.7 84.9 –203.7 2021
16.9 –14.4 1.9 –16.3 19.3 20.7 24.4 – 1.4 2.6 – 3.9 15.0 – 0.8 793.3 2022
– 0.9 4.1 6.4 – 2.3 39.9 28.3 15.1 11.7 – 2.4 14.1 42.6 34.1 –218.1 2023
2.0 – 4.1 0.0 – 4.1 8.4 9.2 9.6 – 0.8 – 1.7 0.9 8.8 4.8 –199.3 2022 Nov.
1.8 1.5 0.9 0.6 –15.6 – 9.3 – 6.2 – 6.4 – 1.9 – 4.5 –75.0 –69.5 112.9 Dec.
0.1 – 1.6 2.3 – 3.9 16.3 9.4 10.0 6.9 – 0.6 7.5 33.4 27.8 –121.8 2023 Jan.
– 0.4 5.6 – 2.0 7.7 – 0.2 – 0.7 – 1.4 0.5 1.1 – 0.7 – 1.7 – 6.6 156.4 Feb.
– 1.2 – 3.0 0.8 – 3.7 6.1 4.6 – 3.0 1.5 – 0.4 1.9 9.6 6.5 –170.1 Mar.
– 1.0 – 1.2 2.1 – 3.3 8.0 8.5 5.4 – 0.5 1.4 – 1.9 –14.9 –15.4 11.9 Apr.
0.9 – 4.7 – 1.2 – 3.5 5.4 2.1 3.9 3.4 – 0.4 3.7 28.3 28.1 10.1 May
4.2 3.0 – 1.1 4.1 – 0.9 – 5.5 – 5.9 4.6 – 0.9 5.5 – 9.4 – 8.3 60.3 June
– 1.2 3.0 3.4 – 0.4 – 1.7 4.4 3.4 – 6.1 – 0.3 – 5.7 10.3 12.6 120.4 July
– 2.8 1.5 – 2.6 4.1 1.9 – 1.9 1.0 3.8 0.5 3.4 – 5.1 – 1.9 – 2.2 Aug.
0.7 – 0.3 2.6 – 2.9 – 0.7 0.4 – 0.3 – 1.1 0.9 – 2.0 6.6 3.7 71.3 Sep.
0.7 3.0 3.1 – 0.0 0.5 1.1 0.5 – 0.5 0.0 – 0.6 3.9 8.3 – 5.0 Oct.
– 0.8 0.9 – 1.5 2.4 6.4 6.7 5.8 – 0.3 – 1.2 0.9 – 3.0 – 5.3 –193.1 Nov.
– 0.1 – 2.2 0.7 – 2.8 – 1.4 – 0.9 – 4.4 – 0.5 – 2.5 2.0 –15.2 –15.5 –156.4 Dec.
0.7 4.6 2.0 2.6 9.7 3.5 3.4 6.2 0.4 5.8 25.3 27.8 – 5.1 2024 Jan.
1.0 0.1 – 1.7 1.8 3.9 6.0 7.4 – 2.1 – 0.3 – 1.8 38.2 31.8 49.2 Feb.
2.7 0.7 2.4 – 1.6 13.9 6.4 1.0 7.6 – 0.4 7.9 5.4 – 0.2 –47.1 Mar.
0.1 0.6 2.6 – 2.0 – 5.8 – 4.0 – 0.4 – 1.8 0.7 – 2.5 4.6 1.8 85.7 Apr.
0.8 2.1 – 0.4 2.5 4.1 8.0 2.9 – 3.9 – 1.1 – 2.8 34.2 34.8 –51.5 May
– 1.4 7.1 3.0 4.2 3.1 – 4.3 – 3.6 7.4 0.2 7.2 –17.0 –19.8 –73.0 June
3.1 1.7 0.5 1.2 – 6.7 – 6.7 3.2 – 0.1 – 0.5 0.4 0.2 – 7.2 –136.8 July
of equalisation claims.  3 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures
(see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
22•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Liabilities
€ billion
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area   Deposits of banks (MFIs)
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks 
of banks
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1 Totalin the
home
countryin other
Member
States Total Total 
Overnight Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Total 
Overnight
End of year or month 
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2018 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2019 8,311.0 1,242.8 1,010.4 232.4 3,778.1 3,649.8 2,230.9 843.7 261.7 575.1 540.5 116.3 54.6
2020 8,943.3 1,493.2 1,237.0 256.3 4,021.6 3,836.7 2,508.4 767.8 227.1 560.5 533.2 135.1 57.0
2021 9,172.2 1,628.6 1,338.6 289.9 4,129.9 3,931.8 2,649.3 721.3 203.9 561.2 537.1 153.8 70.7
2022 10,517.9 1,618.6 1,231.6 387.0 4,343.5 4,093.8 2,712.1 848.6 353.7 533.2 510.2 180.5 84.1
2023 10,321.0 1,489.3 1,099.9 389.4 4,419.1 4,174.5 2,530.0 1,198.7 693.4 445.9 395.3 186.3 75.9
2022 Oct. 11,036.0 1,837.4 1,419.0 418.4 4,359.6 4,122.0 2,741.6 838.3 334.6 542.1 519.8 190.0 92.4
Nov. 10,762.4 1,773.7 1,345.0 428.7 4,401.0 4,132.6 2,752.4 843.3 344.7 536.8 514.3 193.1 97.3
Dec. 10,517.9 1,618.6 1,231.6 387.0 4,343.5 4,093.8 2,712.1 848.6 353.7 533.2 510.2 180.5 84.1
2023 Jan. 10,585.0 1,642.4 1,231.2 411.2 4,392.0 4,124.2 2,706.4 895.1 397.6 522.7 498.8 188.7 94.3
Feb. 10,760.9 1,633.5 1,226.0 407.5 4,391.4 4,113.2 2,670.6 926.7 428.4 515.9 490.8 191.2 97.2
Mar. 10,553.8 1,618.0 1,210.4 407.6 4,368.3 4,092.1 2,625.3 959.7 462.3 507.2 480.5 197.9 98.8
Apr. 10,564.3 1,632.8 1,227.7 405.1 4,370.1 4,099.8 2,620.9 980.3 482.3 498.6 470.4 199.5 93.6
May 10,653.7 1,622.7 1,229.8 392.9 4,384.2 4,108.2 2,613.0 1,004.7 504.1 490.6 460.2 201.6 97.9
June 10,577.7 1,530.6 1,149.6 381.0 4,378.1 4,110.1 2,586.3 1,040.5 541.1 483.3 450.2 196.6 90.9
July 10,743.2 1,563.0 1,159.8 403.2 4,382.4 4,116.2 2,569.6 1,070.7 572.0 475.9 439.9 197.0 90.2
Aug. 10,735.3 1,549.2 1,162.1 387.0 4,388.3 4,124.6 2,555.7 1,101.4 603.4 467.5 428.7 191.6 87.5
Sep. 10,737.5 1,500.0 1,112.7 387.3 4,384.5 4,126.8 2,545.8 1,119.2 620.4 461.8 420.1 193.4 89.5
Oct. 10,797.9 1,530.0 1,132.1 398.0 4,398.0 4,135.1 2,528.3 1,151.4 653.5 455.4 410.8 198.1 88.2
Nov. 10,610.8 1,547.2 1,136.6 410.5 4,414.1 4,158.1 2,538.2 1,171.5 670.5 448.3 400.3 197.0 89.8
Dec. 10,321.0 1,489.3 1,099.9 389.4 4,419.1 4,174.5 2,530.0 1,198.7 693.4 445.9 395.3 186.3 75.9
2024 Jan. 10,454.3 1,538.7 1,125.8 412.8 4,411.2 4,162.0 2,484.1 1,238.6 733.2 439.4 386.3 189.6 81.6
Feb. 10,584.8 1,553.3 1,134.8 418.5 4,408.0 4,160.5 2,466.4 1,259.7 753.8 434.4 378.9 191.6 82.1
Mar. 10,509.6 1,495.3 1,083.4 411.9 4,436.4 4,186.1 2,467.5 1,288.2 781.6 430.3 373.2 191.5 82.7
Apr. 10,598.5 1,520.0 1,094.3 425.7 4,435.0 4,186.5 2,463.4 1,297.4 789.0 425.7 367.7 191.0 84.1
May 10,578.7 1,503.4 1,088.4 415.0 4,464.9 4,209.9 2,484.8 1,303.0 793.5 422.2 363.7 196.0 88.3
June 10,491.1 1,479.3 1,067.5 411.8 4,469.5 4,211.8 2,481.9 1,311.8 800.8 418.1 359.1 197.6 92.0
July 10,314.1 1,469.6 1,059.6 410.0 4,462.3 4,214.7 2,484.4 1,316.2 805.1 414.0 355.0 191.0 82.5
Changes 4
2015 –191.4 –62.1 –50.3 –11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 –37.0 –10.1 –11.3 4.2 – 0.4 – 0.3
2016 184.3 –31.6 – 2.2 –29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 –11.1 1.4 – 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.9
2017 8.0 30.6 14.8 15.8 124.2 107.7 145.8 –32.5 –15.3 – 5.6 1.5 16.4 5.8
2018 101.8 –20.1 –25.7 5.6 112.4 114.7 137.7 –18.8 – 6.5 – 4.3 1.2 – 4.3 2.3
2019 483.4 12.6 –10.0 22.6 132.1 120.0 154.1 –30.6 – 6.6 – 3.4 – 0.6 10.6 8.7
2020 769.5 340.0 317.0 23.0 244.9 188.4 277.6 –74.7 –34.9 –14.5 – 7.2 18.7 1.8
2021 207.2 133.4 103.4 30.0 107.3 96.2 141.4 –45.8 –23.3 0.6 3.9 16.6 13.6
2022 1,170.5 –15.6 –105.9 90.3 208.9 165.9 60.6 132.8 148.1 –27.5 –26.3 18.4 12.8
2023 –133.8 –133.9 –138.4 4.5 89.6 93.4 –172.3 347.9 338.5 –82.3 –109.9 7.1 – 7.1
2022 Nov. –245.9 –60.3 –73.0 12.7 45.6 21.3 14.3 12.2 10.1 – 5.3 – 5.4 – 3.2 5.4
Dec. –225.1 –152.7 –112.7 –40.0 –55.4 –37.3 –39.2 5.6 9.4 – 3.7 – 4.1 –11.9 –12.8
2023 Jan. 87.5 23.3 0.0 23.3 49.1 30.9 –10.4 46.7 44.0 – 5.5 – 6.4 8.2 10.1
Feb. 167.0 –10.3 – 5.6 – 4.7 – 1.8 –11.8 –36.4 31.3 30.7 – 6.7 – 7.9 2.1 2.7
Mar. –195.2 –13.4 –14.7 1.3 –21.7 –20.0 –44.1 32.8 33.5 – 8.7 –10.3 7.1 1.8
Apr. 16.7 15.5 17.5 – 1.9 2.4 8.1 – 4.1 20.8 20.2 – 8.6 –10.1 1.8 – 5.1
May 91.9 –10.1 2.1 –12.1 13.1 8.4 – 7.9 24.3 21.7 – 8.0 –10.2 1.1 4.2
June –65.9 –90.3 –79.4 –11.0 – 6.3 1.5 –26.3 35.0 36.1 – 7.3 – 9.9 – 4.7 – 6.9
July 170.6 31.5 10.4 21.1 4.9 6.5 –16.4 30.2 31.0 – 7.3 –10.3 0.6 – 0.7
Aug. –15.1 –13.3 2.8 –16.1 6.4 7.9 –13.6 30.0 30.7 – 8.5 –11.2 – 4.4 – 2.4
Sep. 1.6 –49.2 –49.4 0.2 – 3.9 2.2 – 9.9 17.8 17.3 – 5.7 – 8.6 1.8 1.9
Oct. 68.3 30.9 19.9 11.0 13.8 8.5 –17.4 32.3 33.1 – 6.4 – 9.4 4.7 – 1.2
Nov. –174.8 18.9 5.1 13.8 17.5 23.9 10.6 20.4 17.2 – 7.1 –10.5 – 0.7 2.1
Dec. –286.4 –67.4 –47.2 –20.3 16.0 27.3 3.4 26.4 23.1 – 2.5 – 5.0 –10.5 –13.8
2024 Jan. 123.8 48.2 25.6 22.5 – 8.9 –13.2 –46.4 39.8 39.6 – 6.5 – 9.1 3.0 5.5
Feb. 132.1 14.8 9.0 5.8 – 3.2 – 1.5 –17.7 21.1 20.7 – 5.0 – 7.3 2.0 0.4
Mar. –75.2 –57.9 –51.4 – 6.6 28.4 25.6 1.2 28.5 27.8 – 4.1 – 5.7 – 0.1 0.6
Apr. 86.9 24.2 10.9 13.4 – 1.7 0.2 – 4.3 9.1 7.3 – 4.6 – 5.5 – 0.6 1.3
May –11.7 –15.1 – 5.1 –10.1 30.5 23.9 21.8 5.5 4.4 – 3.5 – 4.0 5.1 4.3
June –95.0 –23.3 –19.2 – 4.1 2.0 – 0.5 – 3.3 6.9 7.1 – 4.2 – 4.5 1.4 3.6
July –176.7 – 9.7 – 7.9 – 1.8 – 7.2 2.9 2.5 4.4 4.3 – 4.0 – 4.1 – 6.6 – 9.4
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.
1 See footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Excluding deposits of central governments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
23•
IV. Banks
  Debt securities issued  3
in other Member States  2 Deposits of
central governments
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Totalof which:
domestic
central
govern-
mentsLiabilities
arising
from
repos with
non-banks
in the
euro areaMoney
market
fund
shares
issued  3 Totalof which:
with
maturities
of up to
2 years  3Liabilities
to non-
euro 
area
residentsCapital
and
reservesOther
Liabilities  1 Period
End of year or month
42.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 2016
63.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 2017
56.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7 2018
59.0 16.5 2.7 2.4 12.0 11.2 1.5 1.9 1,063.2 32.3 559.4 728.6 935.6 2019
75.6 30.6 2.6 2.3 49.8 48.6 9.4 2.5 1,056.9 21.2 617.6 710.8 1,031.3 2020
80.7 22.8 2.4 2.2 44.2 43.5 2.2 2.3 1,110.8 27.5 757.2 732.3 809.0 2021
94.3 32.4 2.2 2.0 69.2 66.8 3.4 2.7 1,185.1 40.8 800.4 747.2 1,817.1 2022
108.4 37.8 2.0 1.6 58.3 52.0 5.0 3.2 1,279.0 80.5 723.0 784.8 1,617.7 2023
95.4 39.7 2.2 2.1 47.6 44.9 4.0 2.6 1,202.6 39.4 980.8 751.8 1,897.2 2022 Oct.
93.5 31.3 2.2 2.0 75.4 71.1 4.7 2.6 1,202.3 42.2 939.7 747.3 1,691.1 Nov.
94.3 32.4 2.2 2.0 69.2 66.8 3.4 2.7 1,185.1 40.8 800.4 747.2 1,817.1 Dec.
92.3 30.4 2.2 2.0 79.1 73.8 3.9 2.5 1,205.2 47.4 890.6 728.9 1,719.6 2023 Jan.
91.8 30.0 2.2 1.9 87.0 82.5 5.0 2.4 1,221.5 55.6 901.8 724.9 1,880.4 Feb.
97.0 28.5 2.1 1.9 78.2 73.3 4.7 2.6 1,231.2 64.6 863.1 734.8 1,731.0 Mar.
103.7 33.9 2.1 1.9 70.8 65.9 5.4 2.8 1,235.3 67.3 856.2 735.7 1,726.0 Apr.
101.6 30.7 2.1 1.8 74.4 62.4 6.0 2.6 1,257.3 72.3 888.2 746.9 1,745.8 May
103.6 32.5 2.0 1.8 71.4 64.0 4.8 2.6 1,253.9 75.7 853.4 749.6 1,804.7 June
104.8 33.2 2.0 1.7 69.2 61.5 6.5 2.9 1,262.0 76.3 855.0 757.2 1,914.3 July
102.0 32.4 2.0 1.7 72.2 61.5 5.8 3.0 1,271.3 83.5 840.0 765.2 1,912.5 Aug.
102.0 32.6 2.0 1.7 64.3 60.0 4.9 3.0 1,280.7 82.6 825.8 765.1 1,973.5 Sep.
107.9 37.8 2.0 1.6 64.8 59.7 6.2 2.9 1,288.5 84.7 843.9 755.9 1,972.3 Oct.
105.2 34.5 2.0 1.6 59.1 55.1 6.6 3.0 1,286.3 83.6 805.3 769.5 1,778.8 Nov.
108.4 37.8 2.0 1.6 58.3 52.0 5.0 3.2 1,279.0 80.5 723.0 784.8 1,617.7 Dec.
106.1 35.6 1.9 1.6 59.5 50.5 9.1 3.3 1,304.0 83.0 775.3 756.5 1,656.1 2024 Jan.
107.6 39.2 1.9 1.5 55.9 49.5 10.0 3.3 1,316.2 83.3 831.9 749.6 1,712.5 Feb.
106.8 37.5 1.9 1.5 58.8 49.9 9.1 3.5 1,320.0 82.7 834.2 756.2 1,655.0 Mar.
105.0 35.6 1.9 1.5 57.4 49.2 9.5 3.7 1,324.9 77.3 821.9 746.5 1,736.9 Apr.
105.8 34.8 1.9 1.5 59.0 49.5 8.7 3.8 1,327.0 75.7 832.8 756.7 1,681.4 May
103.8 33.3 1.9 1.4 60.1 49.5 9.3 4.0 1,327.0 79.4 825.3 786.7 1,590.0 June
106.6 36.5 1.9 1.4 56.6 49.1 10.1 4.2 1,316.6 76.1 786.1 789.8 1,475.2 July
Changes 4
– 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 – 0.4 – 1.9 – 1.0 – 0.0 –86.8 7.7 –30.3 28.0 –143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 2.2 – 1.2 – 0.3 – 1.1 8.6 – 1.3 116.1 26.4 –39.5 2016
10.8 4.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.1 – 0.3 – 3.3 – 8.5 –16.1 34.1 –162.3 2017
– 6.4 – 4.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 2.1 2.1 – 2.6 0.3 30.0 – 5.9 –36.0 7.4 10.3 2018
2.0 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.1 1.4 1.4 5.6 – 0.5 22.3 0.1 –47.9 30.0 329.1 2019
17.0 14.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 37.8 37.3 3.6 0.6 11.8 – 9.3 61.6 – 1.5 108.5 2020
3.1 – 8.0 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 5.5 – 5.0 – 7.9 0.3 40.6 6.9 124.9 16.6 –207.9 2021
5.8 8.5 – 0.3 – 0.2 24.6 23.0 1.2 0.4 67.2 12.6 45.6 5.0 857.7 2022
14.4 6.7 – 0.2 – 0.4 –10.9 –14.8 1.8 0.5 110.6 43.1 –55.7 43.3 –189.9 2023
– 8.6 – 8.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 27.5 25.8 0.8 0.0 7.4 2.4 –29.9 – 1.1 –208.4 2022 Nov.
1.0 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 6.3 – 4.3 – 1.3 0.1 –11.5 – 1.2 –132.1 1.9 125.9 Dec.
– 1.9 – 1.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 9.9 6.9 0.5 – 0.2 22.4 6.6 95.0 –17.6 –85.0 2023 Jan.
– 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 7.9 8.7 1.2 – 0.1 13.0 8.1 6.9 – 5.0 163.2 Feb.
5.3 – 1.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 8.8 – 9.2 – 0.3 0.3 13.6 9.2 –33.8 11.2 –151.2 Mar.
6.9 5.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 7.4 – 7.4 0.7 0.1 5.7 2.7 – 4.9 1.8 – 4.7 Apr.
– 3.1 – 3.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 3.6 – 3.5 0.6 – 0.1 23.4 6.5 32.0 9.4 23.5 May
2.1 2.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 3.0 1.6 – 1.1 – 0.0 0.4 4.1 –28.3 3.6 56.2 June
1.2 0.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.1 – 2.5 1.7 0.3 10.2 0.7 4.2 8.1 109.7 July
– 2.1 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 2.9 – 0.0 – 0.7 0.1 7.0 7.1 –18.9 7.2 – 2.8 Aug.
– 0.1 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 7.9 – 1.5 – 0.9 0.1 10.3 0.0 –14.2 – 1.0 60.4 Sep.
5.9 5.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.6 – 0.3 1.4 – 0.1 8.3 2.2 19.1 – 4.6 – 0.4 Oct.
– 2.8 – 3.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 5.7 – 4.6 0.4 0.1 2.0 – 1.0 –32.8 14.8 –195.8 Nov.
3.3 3.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.8 – 3.1 – 1.6 0.1 – 5.6 – 3.0 –80.1 15.3 –163.0 Dec.
– 2.5 – 2.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.2 – 1.5 4.1 0.1 21.1 2.4 48.0 –29.3 40.5 2024 Jan.
1.5 3.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 3.6 – 1.0 0.8 0.0 12.5 0.2 56.7 – 6.4 57.0 Feb.
– 0.7 – 1.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 2.9 0.5 – 0.9 0.2 3.6 – 0.6 2.0 6.6 –57.1 Mar.
– 1.9 – 2.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 1.4 – 0.8 0.4 0.2 3.6 – 5.4 –14.2 –10.0 84.4 Apr.
0.8 – 0.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.5 0.3 – 0.8 0.1 4.2 – 1.6 13.9 10.7 –55.2 May
– 2.1 – 1.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.0 – 0.1 0.6 0.2 – 2.9 3.7 –11.2 29.5 –89.7 June
2.8 3.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 3.4 – 0.4 0.8 0.3 –10.7 – 3.7 –39.2 3.5 –114.5 July
3 In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money
market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published togetherwith money market fund shares.  4 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
24•
IV. Banks
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Loans
End of
monthNumber of
reporting
institu-
tionsBalance
sheet
total  1Cash in
hand and
credit
balances
with
central
banks TotalBalances
and
loansSecurities
issued by
banks Totalfor
up to and
including
1 yearfor
more than
1 year BillsSecurities
issued by
non-banksPartici-
pating
interestsOther
assets  1
All categories of banks
2024 Feb. 1,334 10,669.6 64.3 3,622.7 3,122.5 496.3 5,056.1 485.2 3,829.4 0.1 726.6 96.2 1,830.3
Mar. 1,333 10,597.2 65.1 3,580.4 3,074.4 502.4 5,068.9 480.5 3,829.3 0.1 743.3 96.5 1,786.4
Apr. 1,330 10,690.1 63.1 3,575.2 3,068.4 503.7 5,078.4 493.8 3,832.7 0.1 733.6 97.0 1,876.4
May 1,330 10,674.3 60.6 3,599.9 3,089.2 507.2 5,088.1 495.0 3,838.3 0.1 737.5 97.2 1,828.4
June 1,326 10,588.4 63.9 3,567.3 3,058.2 505.9 5,102.0 500.3 3,835.7 0.1 748.2 97.4 1,757.9
July 1,324 10,413.0 66.7 3,511.2 2,997.5 510.3 5,108.5 498.1 3,847.4 0.1 746.1 100.7 1,625.9
Commercial banks 6
2024 June 239 4,864.2 23.9 1,684.5 1,587.3 96.7 1,686.1 333.8 1,058.0 0.1 285.4 30.5 1,439.4
July 240 4,738.6 23.0 1,676.4 1,574.0 101.5 1,690.4 336.4 1,062.2 0.1 283.3 33.8 1,315.1
Big banks 7
2024 June 3 2,407.5 10.8 697.5 656.5 41.0 777.8 170.2 449.0 0.0 154.4 24.7 896.7
July 3 2,280.1 10.3 717.6 674.5 43.1 777.5 172.1 448.2 0.0 153.1 24.8 750.0
Regional banks and other commercial banks
2024 June 127 1,949.8 9.8 662.6 610.2 52.3 749.7 115.5 509.1 0.1 121.1 4.8 522.8
July 127 1,991.1 9.0 673.2 617.6 55.0 756.3 118.1 514.4 0.1 120.2 8.1 544.5
Branches of foreign banks
2024 June 109 506.9 3.3 324.4 320.6 3.4 158.6 48.1 100.0 – 9.9 0.9 19.8
July 110 467.5 3.7 285.6 281.8 3.4 156.6 46.1 99.6 – 10.0 0.9 20.7
Landesbanken
2024 June 6 900.2 2.2 345.7 288.2 57.3 433.6 48.5 342.2 0.0 39.1 9.6 109.1
July 6 886.3 1.9 337.0 280.1 56.6 432.0 46.8 343.2 0.0 38.6 9.5 105.9
Savings banks
2024 June 352 1,555.4 20.5 272.5 152.8 119.7 1,220.7 54.3 998.3 – 168.0 16.7 25.1
July 350 1,553.9 22.6 265.9 146.1 119.7 1,223.6 55.1 1,000.4 – 168.0 16.7 25.1
Credit cooperatives
2024 June 690 1,179.1 12.5 215.4 105.1 110.0 898.8 35.8 745.7 0.0 117.2 20.6 31.8
July 689 1,183.0 13.5 215.8 105.5 109.9 901.4 35.2 749.0 0.0 117.2 20.7 31.7
Mortgage banks
2024 June 7 220.3 0.2 17.2 9.8 7.4 197.6 2.9 181.4 – 13.3 0.1 5.2
July 7 220.1 0.1 17.4 9.9 7.5 197.1 2.8 181.0 – 13.3 0.1 5.4
Building and loan associations
2024 June 14 258.6 0.2 39.5 23.9 15.7 214.7 1.3 192.9 . 20.5 0.2 4.0
July 14 259.6 0.1 39.7 24.1 15.7 215.3 1.3 193.2 . 20.8 0.2 4.2
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2024 June 18 1,610.5 4.6 992.5 891.3 99.1 450.6 23.8 317.2 0.0 104.7 19.6 143.2
July 18 1,571.4 5.4 959.1 857.8 99.3 448.7 20.6 318.5 – 104.9 19.7 138.5
Memo item:    Foreign banks 8
2024 June 140 2,359.3 10.3 845.9 804.7 40.7 743.6 159.4 435.3 0.1 141.8 2.8 756.8
July 141 2,243.7 10.2 823.0 778.7 43.5 733.0 152.0 434.9 0.1 139.9 2.8 674.8
of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2024 June 31 1,852.4 7.0 521.6 484.1 37.3 585.0 111.4 335.3 0.1 131.9 1.9 737.0
July 31 1,776.2 6.5 537.4 496.8 40.1 576.4 105.9 335.3 0.1 129.8 1.9 654.1
* Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified as
MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3.  1 Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative financial
instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the meaning ofSection 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handelsgesetzbuch) read
in conjunction with Section 35 (1) number 1a of the Credit Institution Accounting
Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute) are classified
under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting date. Trading
portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Series Banking statistics, in
Tables I.1 to I.3.  2 For building and loan associations: including deposits under savings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
25•
IV. Banks
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4
TotalSight
depositsTime
deposits TotalSight
depositsfor
up to and
including
1 yearfor
more
than
1 year  2Memo
item:
Liabilities
arising
from
repos  3 Totalof which:
At 3
months'
noticeBank
savings
bondsBearer
debt
securities
out-
standing  5Capital
including
published
reserves,
partici-
pation
rights
capital,
funds for
general
banking
risksOther
liabi-
lities  1End of
month
All categories of banks
2,160.6 695.9 1,464.7 4,639.5 2,690.2 668.5 683.4 97.3 439.0 382.6 158.4 1,386.3 610.9 1,872.3 2024 Feb.
2,124.4 661.5 1,462.9 4,647.7 2,672.0 692.5 686.5 79.1 434.9 376.8 161.8 1,400.3 615.4 1,809.3 Mar.
2,124.0 685.4 1,438.5 4,659.1 2,682.6 695.3 685.0 90.9 430.2 371.3 166.0 1,393.5 619.0 1,894.5 Apr.
2,122.4 712.2 1,410.2 4,684.0 2,709.0 692.6 687.4 87.4 426.7 367.2 168.4 1,395.6 626.0 1,846.3 May
2,100.8 708.1 1,392.7 4,679.2 2,698.6 697.9 689.0 86.5 422.5 362.6 171.1 1,408.0 638.9 1,761.7 June
2,048.1 669.5 1,378.6 4,670.8 2,688.5 702.9 688.4 86.5 418.4 358.4 172.6 1,390.2 644.3 1,659.6 July
Commercial banks 6
1,137.3 543.1 594.1 1,909.9 1,169.3 353.9 250.0 85.0 85.1 54.6 51.7 219.2 223.5 1,374.3 2024 June
1,095.8 518.7 577.0 1,917.4 1,167.5 365.7 249.0 85.1 84.4 53.6 50.7 223.5 227.3 1,274.6 July
Big banks 7
426.9 181.8 245.1 878.8 527.9 196.3 73.6 45.8 77.2 47.5 3.8 165.6 87.2 848.9 2024 June
419.1 192.4 226.7 882.1 525.9 202.7 73.1 47.6 76.7 46.7 3.7 168.9 87.2 722.8 July
Regional banks and other commercial banks
457.2 226.5 230.7 816.9 499.1 109.7 152.7 39.2 7.6 6.8 47.8 52.0 119.1 504.7 2024 June
468.4 234.7 233.7 816.0 494.0 115.8 151.8 37.5 7.5 6.7 46.9 53.1 122.9 530.7 July
Branches of foreign banks
253.2 134.9 118.3 214.3 142.4 47.9 23.7 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.1 1.6 17.2 20.7 2024 June
208.3 91.7 116.6 219.2 147.6 47.2 24.1 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.1 1.6 17.2 21.2 July
Landesbanken
209.6 44.7 164.9 303.5 155.3 73.6 68.2 0.8 4.3 4.3 2.2 228.5 44.2 114.5 2024 June
205.9 38.2 167.6 296.6 149.5 72.3 68.3 0.8 4.2 4.2 2.3 227.5 44.2 112.2 July
Savings banks
151.0 4.4 146.5 1,173.6 762.2 98.4 20.5 – 201.5 182.8 91.0 23.8 148.0 59.0 2024 June
149.0 4.0 145.0 1,173.0 760.5 99.3 20.9 – 199.2 180.6 93.0 24.0 149.4 58.5 July
Credit cooperatives
154.5 2.7 151.8 866.4 531.4 133.7 44.3 – 131.2 120.6 25.8 9.0 111.2 38.0 2024 June
154.5 2.2 152.3 869.3 533.6 134.9 44.5 – 130.1 119.6 26.2 9.1 111.5 38.7 July
Mortgage banks
41.4 3.3 38.1 54.6 2.5 6.0 46.1 0.3 – – . 107.7 9.2 7.4 2024 June
41.0 3.1 37.9 54.2 2.2 5.7 46.3 0.2 – – . 108.2 9.2 7.6 July
Building and loan associations
37.6 3.0 34.7 192.2 4.1 3.0 184.6 – 0.4 0.4 0.1 7.6 13.2 8.0 2024 June
38.8 3.0 35.8 192.0 4.4 3.2 183.9 – 0.4 0.4 0.1 7.6 13.2 8.0 July
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
369.4 106.9 262.6 178.9 73.8 29.4 75.4 0.4 – – . 812.1 89.5 160.5 2024 June
363.2 100.2 263.0 168.4 70.8 21.8 75.4 0.4 – – . 790.3 89.5 160.0 July
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
683.6 364.9 318.6 777.1 488.9 145.8 107.6 45.8 7.2 6.8 27.5 51.4 104.6 742.6 2024 June
645.9 328.5 317.4 777.7 488.9 146.9 107.8 44.2 7.0 6.7 27.1 51.3 104.9 663.9 July
of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
430.3 230.0 200.3 562.8 346.6 97.9 83.9 45.8 6.9 6.6 27.5 49.8 87.4 722.0 2024 June
437.6 236.8 200.8 558.5 341.3 99.7 83.7 44.2 6.8 6.4 27.1 49.7 87.6 642.7 July
and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  3 Included in time deposits.  4 Excluding deposits
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2).  5 Including subordinated
negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
6 Commercial banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other
commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign banks”.  7 Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner
Bank AG (up to Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische
Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG), Deutsche Postbank AG (from December 2004 up to April2018) and DB Privat- und Firmenkundenbank AG (from May 2018) (see the explanatory
notes in the Statistical Series Banking statistics, Table I.3, banking group “Big banks “).
8 Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in other categories
of banks and the category ”Branches (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”.
9 Separate presentation of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks included in
other banking categories.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
26•
IV. Banks
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
PeriodCash in
hand
(euro area
banknotes
and
coins)Credit
balances
with the
Bundes-
bank TotalCredit
balances
and loans BillsNegotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
banksSecurities
issued by
banksMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total Loans BillsTreasury
bills and
negotiable
money mar-
ket paper
issued by
non-banksSecurities
issued
by non-
banks  1
End of year or month *
2014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2017 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
2018 40.4 416.1 1,323.5 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 239.0 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.9
2019 43.2 476.6 1,254.7 1,016.2 0.0 0.7 237.9 4.5 3,521.5 3,119.2 0.3 3.3 398.7
2020 47.2 792.9 1,367.9 1,119.7 0.0 0.7 247.5 8.8 3,647.0 3,245.1 0.2 4.0 397.7
2021 49.4 905.0 1,409.6 1,163.7 – 0.5 245.3 10.3 3,798.1 3,392.4 0.3 2.6 402.8
2022 19.8 67.3 2,347.0 2,101.4 – 1.0 244.6 12.1 4,015.6 3,613.1 0.2 2.7 399.6
2023 18.5 52.0 2,280.7 2,029.3 – 0.8 250.6 24.2 4,044.1 3,649.9 0.1 0.9 393.3
2023 Feb. 17.8 52.2 2,471.9 2,222.2 – 1.0 248.8 12.8 4,030.2 3,629.4 0.1 2.9 397.9
Mar. 17.7 53.5 2,426.8 2,175.1 – 1.0 250.7 12.6 4,030.5 3,634.7 0.1 4.3 391.4
Apr. 18.7 54.2 2,434.7 2,182.3 – 1.1 251.3 12.7 4,032.5 3,641.2 0.1 3.2 388.1
May 18.1 48.7 2,483.6 2,230.4 – 0.8 252.4 12.7 4,039.0 3,650.5 0.1 2.2 386.2
June 17.5 51.6 2,366.1 2,114.1 – 0.9 251.0 12.7 4,042.1 3,645.6 0.1 2.9 393.5
July 17.0 69.9 2,369.8 2,118.4 – 1.1 250.3 12.8 4,048.7 3,653.9 0.1 3.2 391.6
Aug. 17.3 46.7 2,392.0 2,139.7 – 1.2 251.1 12.9 4,046.7 3,649.9 0.1 2.5 394.2
Sep. 17.9 49.6 2,305.0 2,056.1 – 1.0 247.8 12.9 4,048.1 3,653.5 0.1 3.4 391.1
Oct. 17.4 62.2 2,351.7 2,102.8 – 0.8 248.0 13.1 4,051.9 3,656.6 0.1 3.0 392.2
Nov. 16.7 45.5 2,375.9 2,122.3 – 0.9 252.7 13.3 4,057.9 3,661.2 0.1 3.1 393.6
Dec. 18.5 52.0 2,280.7 2,029.3 – 0.8 250.6 24.2 4,044.1 3,649.9 0.1 0.9 393.3
2024 Jan. 16.1 73.1 2,330.7 2,070.9 – 0.8 259.0 28.1 4,048.3 3,649.5 0.0 1.4 397.4
Feb. 16.2 47.5 2,376.9 2,112.0 – 0.8 264.1 31.6 4,055.7 3,654.0 0.1 0.5 401.2
Mar. 17.5 46.9 2,325.4 2,058.2 – 0.7 266.5 34.3 4,061.0 3,658.4 0.1 0.5 402.1
Apr. 16.4 46.0 2,319.4 2,050.6 – 0.7 268.1 38.0 4,062.1 3,661.7 0.0 1.7 398.6
May 16.6 43.4 2,317.7 2,048.2 – 0.8 268.7 41.5 4,069.5 3,666.0 0.1 1.2 402.2
June 16.5 46.6 2,313.9 2,045.6 – 0.8 267.5 44.4 4,076.9 3,670.9 0.1 1.1 404.8
July 16.1 50.0 2,259.5 1,989.8 – 0.7 269.0 46.0 4,083.3 3,676.4 0.0 1.1 405.8
Changes *
2015 +0.3 + 73.7 – 80.7 – 4.3 –0.0 – 0.4 –75.9 –0.1 +68.9 +54.1 –0.0 – 0.3 +15.1
2016 +6.5 +129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 – – 0.9 –17.9 +0.4 +43.7 +62.8 –0.1 – 0.1 –18.9
2017 +6.1 +108.4 + 50.3 + 70.4 –0.0 + 0.0 –20.1 –0.1 +57.0 +70.2 +0.0 + 0.4 –13.6
2018 +8.5 + 24.0 – 81.0 – 76.6 +0.0 + 0.1 – 4.4 +3.8 +71.5 +105.4 –0.1 – 0.5 –33.2
2019 +2.8 + 59.7 – 63.0 – 61.1 –0.0 – 0.2 – 1.6 –1.4 +126.7 +129.1 +0.1 + 3.1 – 5.5
2020 +4.1 +316.4 +201.2 +191.6 –0.0 + 0.0 + 9.6 +4.3 +123.2 +123.6 –0.1 + 0.7 – 1.0
2021 +2.2 +111.8 + 44.1 + 46.3 –0.0 – 0.2 – 2.0 +1.5 +152.2 +147.8 +0.0 – 2.2 + 6.6
2022 –29.6 –836.6 +938.0 +938.1 – + 0.2 – 0.3 +1.7 +216.7 +220.1 –0.1 + 0.1 – 3.3
2023 –1.3 – 15.3 – 65.5 – 71.2 – – 0.2 + 5.9 +1.9 +30.9 +39.0 –0.1 – 1.8 – 6.2
2023 Feb. –0.2 – 37.4 + 28.6 + 24.3 – + 0.0 + 4.3 +0.2 +13.3 + 6.3 –0.0 – 1.5 + 8.5
Mar. –0.1 + 1.3 – 45.1 – 47.0 – + 0.0 + 1.9 –0.1 + 0.9 + 6.0 +0.0 + 1.4 – 6.5
Apr. +1.0 + 0.7 + 7.8 + 7.2 – + 0.1 + 0.6 +0.1 + 2.1 + 6.5 +0.0 – 1.2 – 3.2
May –0.7 – 5.5 + 48.9 + 48.1 – – 0.3 + 1.1 –0.0 + 6.5 + 9.4 +0.0 – 1.0 – 1.9
June –0.5 + 2.9 –116.9 –115.7 – + 0.1 – 1.3 +0.0 + 4.4 – 3.7 –0.0 + 0.7 + 7.4
July –0.5 + 18.4 + 3.7 + 4.3 – + 0.2 – 0.8 +0.1 + 6.6 + 8.3 –0.0 + 0.2 – 1.9
Aug. +0.3 – 23.2 + 22.2 + 21.3 – + 0.1 + 0.8 +0.1 – 1.9 – 4.0 +0.0 – 0.6 + 2.7
Sep. +0.6 + 2.8 – 87.0 – 83.6 – – 0.2 – 3.3 +0.1 + 1.3 + 3.7 +0.0 + 0.9 – 3.2
Oct. –0.5 + 12.7 + 46.8 + 46.8 – – 0.2 + 0.2 +0.2 + 3.7 + 3.0 –0.0 – 0.4 + 1.1
Nov. –0.6 – 16.7 + 24.2 + 19.5 – + 0.1 + 4.6 +0.1 + 6.1 + 4.7 +0.0 + 0.1 + 1.3
Dec. +1.8 + 6.5 – 95.5 – 93.3 – – 0.1 – 2.0 +0.6 –12.7 –10.3 –0.0 – 2.2 – 0.2
2024 Jan. –2.4 + 21.1 + 48.6 + 40.3 – – 0.0 + 8.4 +3.9 + 4.0 – 0.5 –0.0 + 0.5 + 4.0
Feb. +0.0 – 25.6 + 46.3 + 41.2 – – 0.0 + 5.1 +3.4 + 6.7 + 3.7 +0.0 – 0.9 + 3.8
Mar. +1.3 – 0.6 – 51.5 – 53.8 – – 0.1 + 2.3 +2.8 + 5.3 + 4.4 +0.0 – 0.1 + 0.9
Apr. –1.1 – 0.8 – 5.9 – 7.5 – + 0.0 + 1.6 +3.7 + 1.1 + 3.3 –0.0 + 1.3 – 3.5
May +0.2 – 2.7 – 1.7 – 2.4 – + 0.1 + 0.6 +3.5 + 7.4 + 4.3 +0.0 – 0.5 + 3.6
June –0.0 + 3.2 – 3.8 – 1.9 – – 0.0 – 1.9 +2.9 + 7.4 + 4.9 –0.0 – 0.1 + 2.6
July –0.4 + 3.4 – 53.0 – 54.3 – – 0.1 + 1.5 +1.6 + 6.9 + 5.9 –0.0 – 0.1 + 1.0
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange ofequalisation claims (see also footnote 2).  2 Including debt securities arising from the
exchange of equalisation claims.  3 Including liabilities arising from registered debt
securities, registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities;

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
27•
IV. Banks
Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Equalisa-
tion
claims  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loansPartici-
pating
interests
in
domestic
banks
and
enterprises TotalSight
deposits
4Time
deposits
4Redis-
counted
bills  5Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
de-
positsTime
deposits
6Savings
de-
posits  7Bank
savings
bonds  8Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
– 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
– 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
– 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016
– 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 2017
– 18.0 90.9 1,020.9 105.5 915.4 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9 2018
– 17.3 90.4 1,010.2 107.2 902.9 0.0 4.4 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 575.2 33.2 32.5 2019
– 23.5 78.3 1,236.7 125.0 1,111.6 0.0 13.1 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 560.6 28.3 34.4 2020
– 25.7 79.2 1,338.4 117.2 1,221.3 0.0 16.4 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 561.2 24.5 34.2 2021
– 25.6 80.3 1,231.6 136.9 1,094.7 0.0 15.7 4,162.0 2,720.6 873.5 533.2 34.6 35.9 2022
– 23.8 80.3 1,099.9 137.9 962.0 0.0 13.5 4,229.0 2,540.8 1,100.1 445.9 142.2 50.1 2023
– 25.6 80.2 1,226.0 140.7 1,085.3 0.0 15.6 4,197.1 2,687.7 947.9 516.0 45.5 37.2 2023 Feb.
– 24.6 80.3 1,210.4 137.0 1,073.4 0.0 15.2 4,167.4 2,639.8 968.6 507.2 51.7 36.4 Mar.
– 24.7 80.9 1,227.7 140.8 1,086.9 0.0 15.2 4,167.3 2,632.0 978.5 498.6 58.3 36.5 Apr.
– 24.7 81.1 1,229.8 137.8 1,091.9 0.0 15.1 4,172.9 2,623.9 993.0 490.6 65.4 36.6 May
– 24.4 81.2 1,149.6 134.0 1,015.6 0.0 14.6 4,176.3 2,600.9 1,020.0 483.3 72.1 36.5 June
– 24.4 81.0 1,159.8 134.8 1,025.0 0.0 14.6 4,180.2 2,582.2 1,042.9 475.9 79.1 36.7 July
– 24.4 80.3 1,162.1 138.5 1,023.7 0.0 14.5 4,188.4 2,568.4 1,061.7 467.5 90.7 36.9 Aug.
– 24.2 80.4 1,112.7 137.4 975.3 0.0 14.1 4,189.3 2,558.0 1,072.5 461.8 97.0 37.1 Sep.
– 24.1 80.3 1,132.1 136.7 995.4 0.0 14.0 4,198.0 2,544.5 1,086.5 455.4 111.6 37.3 Oct.
– 24.0 80.6 1,136.6 140.0 996.7 0.0 14.0 4,217.3 2,552.9 1,085.6 448.3 130.5 37.6 Nov.
– 23.8 80.3 1,099.9 137.9 962.0 0.0 13.5 4,229.0 2,540.8 1,100.1 445.9 142.2 50.1 Dec.
– 23.7 80.3 1,125.8 155.3 970.5 0.0 13.4 4,216.3 2,496.8 1,128.7 439.4 151.4 54.5 2024 Jan.
– 23.7 80.1 1,134.8 161.4 973.4 0.0 13.3 4,213.6 2,478.3 1,143.5 434.4 157.3 57.5 Feb.
– 23.5 80.3 1,083.4 159.4 924.0 0.0 12.8 4,239.0 2,479.2 1,168.8 430.3 160.7 60.2 Mar.
– 23.4 80.8 1,094.3 160.6 933.8 0.0 12.7 4,239.6 2,475.4 1,173.6 425.8 164.8 63.7 Apr.
– 23.5 81.0 1,088.4 158.0 930.5 0.0 12.7 4,263.3 2,497.0 1,176.9 422.2 167.2 66.9 May
– 23.2 81.1 1,067.5 158.5 909.0 0.0 12.3 4,264.7 2,494.2 1,182.5 418.1 170.0 68.9 June
– 23.1 84.5 1,055.5 159.3 896.2 0.0 12.1 4,267.9 2,497.1 1,185.3 414.0 171.5 70.0 July
Changes *
– –2.1 –4.3 –46.6 + 3.3 –50.0 +0.0 –1.3 +106.5 +156.2 –28.3 –11.3 –10.1 –1.6 2015
– –1.3 +1.5 – 1.7 + 0.3 – 2.0 +0.0 –0.5 +104.7 +124.5 – 6.9 – 7.9 –5.0 –0.5 2016
– –0.0 –1.6 +11.0 –18.4 +29.4 –0.0 –0.5 +103.1 +142.8 –27.5 – 5.6 –6.7 +0.4 2017
– –1.0 +3.1 –25.0 – 3.1 –21.9 +0.0 –0.4 +117.7 +139.3 –10.8 – 4.3 –6.5 +3.9 2018
– –0.7 +0.1 – 8.6 + 1.6 –10.2 +0.0 –0.3 +122.5 +155.8 –25.7 – 3.4 –4.1 –1.4 2019
– +5.7 –3.3 +313.4 +23.2 +290.2 –0.0 +8.2 +221.6 +273.7 –32.7 –14.5 –4.9 +1.9 2020
– +2.3 +1.0 +105.2 – 7.4 +112.6 +0.0 +3.3 +95.3 +144.3 –46.2 + 0.7 –3.5 –0.2 2021
– –0.1 +1.7 –104.6 + 8.8 –113.4 –0.0 –0.6 +191.8 +65.8 +143.4 –27.5 +10.1 +1.7 2022
– –1.2 +0.6 –139.9 – 8.9 –131.0 ±0.0 –2.3 +76.6 –172.0 +226.4 –82.3 +104.5 +3.5 2023
– –0.0 +0.2 – 5.2 – 1.9 – 3.4 – –0.0 – 2.5 –35.0 +34.4 – 6.7 +4.8 +0.4 2023 Feb.
– –0.3 +0.1 –15.2 – 3.7 –11.5 – –0.4 –29.6 –47.3 +20.2 – 8.7 +6.2 –0.1 Mar.
– +0.0 +1.1 +17.3 + 3.8 +13.5 –0.0 –0.0 – 0.1 – 7.9 + 9.8 – 8.6 +6.6 +0.0 Apr.
– +0.0 +0.2 + 2.1 – 3.0 + 5.0 –0.0 –0.1 + 5.6 – 7.9 +14.5 – 8.0 +7.1 +0.1 May
– –0.4 +0.1 –79.7 – 3.7 –76.0 +0.0 –0.5 + 2.3 –23.0 +26.0 – 7.3 +6.7 –0.1 June
– +0.0 –0.1 +10.2 + 0.8 + 9.4 – –0.0 + 3.8 –18.7 +22.8 – 7.3 +7.0 +0.2 July
– +0.1 –0.8 + 3.1 + 3.9 – 0.8 +0.0 –0.1 + 8.2 –13.2 +21.3 – 8.5 +8.5 +0.2 Aug.
– –0.2 +0.1 –49.4 – 1.1 –48.3 –0.0 –0.4 + 0.9 –10.5 +10.7 – 5.7 +6.3 +0.2 Sep.
– –0.1 –0.1 +19.9 – 0.7 +20.6 –0.0 –0.1 + 8.7 –13.4 +14.0 – 6.4 +14.6 +0.3 Oct.
– –0.1 +0.3 + 4.6 + 3.3 + 1.3 +0.0 –0.0 +19.3 + 8.5 – 1.0 – 7.1 +18.8 +0.3 Nov.
– –0.2 –0.2 –47.3 –12.5 –34.8 –0.0 –0.5 +22.3 – 0.7 +13.7 – 2.5 +11.8 +1.2 Dec.
– –0.1 –0.1 +26.0 +17.4 + 8.6 +0.0 –0.1 –12.7 –44.1 +28.7 – 6.5 +9.2 +4.4 2024 Jan.
– –0.0 –0.2 + 8.9 + 6.1 + 2.9 –0.0 –0.1 – 2.8 –18.4 +14.8 – 5.0 +5.9 +3.0 Feb.
– –0.2 +0.3 –51.4 – 1.9 –49.5 – –0.5 +25.5 + 0.9 +25.3 – 4.1 +3.4 +2.6 Mar.
– –0.1 +0.4 +11.0 + 1.2 + 9.8 – –0.1 + 0.6 – 3.8 + 4.8 – 4.6 +4.2 +3.5 Apr.
– +0.0 +0.2 – 5.3 – 2.6 – 2.7 – –0.1 +23.7 +21.7 + 3.1 – 3.5 +2.4 +3.2 May
– –0.2 +0.1 –18.9 + 0.5 –19.4 – –0.4 – 0.4 – 2.7 + 3.7 – 4.2 +2.8 +2.0 June
– –0.1 +3.4 – 7.9 + 4.8 –12.8 +0.0 –0.2 + 3.1 + 2.9 + 2.8 – 4.0 +1.5 +1.1 July
including subordinated liabilities.  4 Including liabilities arising from monetary policy
operations with the Bundesbank.  5 Own acceptances and promissory notes
outstanding.  6 Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999,including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  7 Excluding
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8).  8 Including liabilities
arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
28•
IV. Banks
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Credit balances and loans, bills Loans and bills
PeriodCash in
hand
(non-
euro area
banknotes
and
coins) Total TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termNegotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
banksSecurities
issued by
banksMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termTreasury
bills and
negotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
non-banksSecurities
issued by
non-banks
End of year or month *
2014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2017 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
2018 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.1
2019 0.2 1,064.2 814.0 532.7 281.3 1.8 248.5 3.7 795.3 513.1 111.0 402.1 7.7 274.5
2020 0.2 1,024.3 784.8 532.1 252.8 2.6 236.8 4.0 822.8 523.0 125.4 397.5 11.3 288.5
2021 0.3 1,100.7 877.5 614.7 262.7 0.4 222.8 3.5 871.2 572.2 151.5 420.7 8.0 290.9
2022 0.2 1,151.3 926.6 656.2 270.4 1.7 223.0 3.7 913.7 616.2 173.0 443.2 14.9 282.6
2023 0.2 1,166.9 934.7 652.0 282.7 3.1 229.2 6.1 960.4 627.3 174.9 452.4 12.3 320.8
2023 Feb. 0.2 1,201.5 965.7 701.9 263.8 2.9 232.9 4.2 946.4 635.5 190.5 444.9 15.8 295.1
Mar. 0.2 1,203.8 968.2 704.1 264.0 2.9 232.7 4.3 953.0 630.8 187.8 443.0 12.5 309.8
Apr. 0.2 1,184.1 946.5 681.7 264.8 3.6 234.0 4.2 959.3 633.6 191.7 441.9 13.9 311.8
May 0.2 1,211.3 972.8 706.0 266.8 3.4 235.1 4.2 965.1 638.1 193.4 444.7 14.6 312.4
June 0.2 1,177.3 939.1 681.7 257.4 3.6 234.6 4.3 961.8 628.4 181.4 447.0 15.8 317.6
July 0.2 1,194.1 955.3 694.8 260.5 4.1 234.7 4.3 962.7 637.4 190.4 447.0 16.4 308.9
Aug. 0.2 1,197.1 959.5 693.8 265.7 3.7 233.9 4.3 954.8 630.9 181.3 449.6 16.2 307.8
Sep. 0.2 1,203.3 966.5 687.9 278.6 3.5 233.3 4.2 958.8 633.0 183.8 449.2 16.1 309.7
Oct. 0.2 1,212.3 975.9 689.7 286.2 3.6 232.8 4.2 956.8 635.7 188.7 447.0 14.6 306.5
Nov. 0.2 1,190.3 954.5 674.0 280.5 3.3 232.4 4.2 971.3 645.4 194.5 450.9 15.3 310.6
Dec. 0.2 1,166.9 934.7 652.0 282.7 3.1 229.2 6.1 960.4 627.3 174.9 452.4 12.3 320.8
2024 Jan. 0.2 1,206.8 971.9 684.9 287.0 2.8 232.0 6.1 985.5 649.3 196.9 452.4 14.6 321.6
Feb. 0.2 1,245.8 1,010.7 724.3 286.4 3.0 232.2 6.9 1,000.4 660.7 204.4 456.3 14.2 325.4
Mar. 0.2 1,255.0 1,016.4 732.9 283.5 2.7 236.0 7.0 1,007.9 651.5 191.9 459.6 15.3 341.2
Apr. 0.2 1,255.8 1,018.0 729.5 288.5 2.2 235.6 7.4 1,016.3 664.8 206.3 458.5 16.5 335.0
May 0.2 1,282.2 1,041.2 755.0 286.2 2.5 238.5 7.5 1,018.6 667.3 207.9 459.4 16.1 335.2
June 0.2 1,253.4 1,012.8 723.8 289.0 2.3 238.3 7.2 1,025.1 665.2 207.3 457.9 16.5 343.4
July 0.2 1,251.7 1,007.8 719.6 288.2 2.6 241.3 7.0 1,025.1 669.1 208.7 460.4 15.8 340.2
Changes *
2015 +0.1 –91.8 –86.0 –82.2 –3.8 –6.7 +0.8 –0.1 –6.1 –9.2 –6.5 –2.7 + 1.1 +2.0
2016 +0.0 –25.5 –14.5 –38.2 +23.7 –0.7 –10.3 –0.0 +17.4 +28.9 +10.1 +18.8 – 3.0 –8.5
2017 +0.0 –57.2 –48.7 –61.5 +12.8 +0.0 –8.5 +0.6 –4.7 +13.0 +8.6 +4.4 + 0.7 –18.4
2018 +0.0 +49.6 +34.0 +57.7 –23.7 +0.2 +15.3 +0.7 +18.3 +28.3 +3.2 +25.2 – 0.4 –9.7
2019 –0.0 –4.1 –11.3 –21.9 +10.7 +0.8 +6.3 +0.7 +26.8 +19.9 +12.7 +7.3 + 3.0 +3.8
2020 –0.0 –32.0 –22.4 –6.6 –15.8 +0.9 –10.5 +0.3 +34.4 +14.7 +9.0 +5.7 + 3.6 +16.1
2021 +0.0 +52.8 +71.1 +68.9 +2.2 –2.5 –15.8 –0.5 +37.8 +39.7 +29.8 +9.9 – 3.2 +1.4
2022 –0.1 +21.7 +20.4 +17.9 +2.6 +1.3 –0.0 +0.2 +37.0 +37.0 +16.8 +20.2 + 6.7 –6.7
2023 –0.0 +32.6 +24.9 +10.2 +14.7 +1.4 +6.3 +0.5 +51.5 +14.8 +5.2 +9.6 – 2.6 +39.3
2023 Feb. +0.0 +0.6 –2.8 –1.2 –1.6 +0.1 +3.3 +0.2 +1.6 –1.2 –1.3 +0.1 – 4.4 +7.2
Mar. –0.0 +9.2 +9.2 +6.2 +3.0 –0.0 –0.1 +0.1 +11.2 –1.1 –1.5 +0.4 – 3.3 +15.5
Apr. +0.0 –17.0 –19.0 –20.9 +1.9 +0.7 +1.3 –0.1 +8.2 +4.4 +4.5 –0.1 + 1.5 +2.4
May +0.0 +16.9 +16.2 +18.0 –1.8 –0.2 +0.9 –0.0 +1.5 +1.4 +1.3 +0.1 + 0.6 –0.5
June +0.0 –17.7 –17.6 –9.9 –7.6 +0.2 –0.3 +0.1 –1.9 –8.7 –11.1 +2.4 + 1.2 +5.6
July –0.0 +18.4 +17.7 +13.9 +3.9 +0.5 +0.2 +0.0 +3.0 +10.5 +9.6 +0.9 + 0.7 –8.2
Aug. –0.0 +0.0 +1.3 –2.2 +3.5 –0.4 –0.9 –0.0 –10.2 –8.3 –9.8 +1.5 – 0.3 –1.6
Sep. +0.0 –1.0 –0.0 –10.1 +10.1 –0.2 –0.7 –0.0 –0.1 –1.2 +1.3 –2.5 – 0.1 +1.1
Oct. +0.0 +10.3 +10.6 +2.6 +8.0 +0.1 –0.4 –0.1 –0.7 +3.8 +5.2 –1.4 – 1.6 –3.0
Nov. – –14.4 –13.9 –11.5 –2.4 –0.2 –0.3 +0.0 +18.7 +12.9 +7.6 +5.3 + 0.8 +5.0
Dec. –0.0 –21.0 –17.6 –21.0 +3.4 –0.3 –3.2 +0.0 –9.7 –17.2 –19.2 +2.0 – 3.0 +10.5
2024 Jan. +0.0 +34.0 +31.6 +29.7 +1.9 –0.2 +2.7 –0.0 +21.4 +19.0 +21.0 –2.0 + 2.2 +0.1
Feb. –0.0 +39.2 +38.9 +39.6 –0.7 +0.1 +0.2 +0.9 +15.8 +12.3 +7.5 +4.8 – 0.3 +3.8
Mar. –0.0 +9.1 +5.6 +8.7 –3.0 –0.3 +3.8 +0.1 +7.7 –9.1 –12.5 +3.4 + 1.0 +15.7
Apr. +0.0 –1.5 –0.8 –4.7 +4.0 –0.4 –0.3 +0.4 +7.1 +12.3 +14.0 –1.6 + 1.2 –6.4
May –0.0 +30.1 +26.8 +27.6 –0.9 +0.3 +3.0 +0.0 +4.4 +4.1 +2.3 +1.8 – 0.4 +0.7
June +0.0 –33.6 –33.1 –34.1 +1.0 –0.2 –0.3 –0.2 +3.4 –4.7 –1.6 –3.1 + 0.4 +7.7
July –0.0 +2.5 –0.8 –1.3 +0.5 +0.3 +3.0 –0.2 +2.3 +5.8 +2.4 +3.4 – 0.7 –2.9
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequentrevisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
29•
IV. Banks
Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Time deposits (including bank
savings bonds)Time deposits (including
savings deposits and bank
savings bonds)
Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loansPartici-
pating
interests
in foreign
banks
and
enter-
prises TotalSight
deposits TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
deposits TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
14.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 2016
12.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 2017
11.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1 2018
11.5 21.3 680.6 339.3 341.2 243.2 98.0 – 229.8 112.3 117.4 60.5 57.0 0.1 2019
11.3 17.2 761.2 428.8 332.5 205.1 127.3 – 258.5 133.3 125.2 65.6 59.7 0.1 2020
11.1 16.6 914.6 456.0 458.6 301.5 157.2 0.0 288.2 141.9 146.2 68.7 77.6 0.1 2021
10.4 15.7 998.4 480.0 518.4 376.4 141.9 – 370.3 196.0 174.3 84.4 89.8 0.1 2022
10.7 16.7 923.8 469.5 454.3 288.1 166.2 – 380.6 176.2 204.4 104.9 99.5 1.1 2023
10.4 15.8 1,086.8 600.1 486.7 345.1 141.6 – 418.4 218.4 200.0 109.9 90.1 0.2 2023 Feb.
10.4 15.9 1,060.0 576.0 484.0 329.3 154.7 – 412.5 216.8 195.7 98.9 96.9 0.3 Mar.
10.4 15.9 1,042.6 540.6 502.0 343.8 158.2 – 423.3 208.8 214.6 116.6 97.9 0.3 Apr.
10.4 16.1 1,059.1 596.1 462.9 299.9 163.0 0.0 436.0 219.3 216.7 116.7 100.0 0.3 May
10.2 16.0 1,025.8 565.0 460.8 302.6 158.2 0.0 411.5 205.6 205.9 107.3 98.6 0.4 June
10.2 16.1 1,052.4 582.3 470.1 311.1 159.0 0.0 411.0 204.0 207.0 107.9 99.1 0.3 July
10.2 16.1 1,021.8 566.5 455.3 294.3 161.1 – 407.7 198.5 209.2 112.0 97.2 0.3 Aug.
10.2 16.1 1,006.0 536.9 469.1 293.9 175.2 – 403.9 206.3 197.6 100.2 97.4 0.4 Sep.
10.2 16.6 1,021.8 558.9 462.9 288.0 174.9 – 423.2 207.0 216.2 117.4 98.8 0.3 Oct.
10.4 16.4 1,003.7 538.0 465.7 291.0 174.6 – 412.5 206.3 206.3 107.1 99.2 0.3 Nov.
10.7 16.7 923.8 469.5 454.3 288.1 166.2 – 380.6 176.2 204.4 104.9 99.5 1.1 Dec.
10.7 16.4 979.5 520.1 459.5 284.6 174.9 – 409.6 200.3 209.3 110.6 98.6 0.7 2024 Jan.
10.7 15.9 1,025.8 534.6 491.2 311.3 179.9 0.0 425.9 211.9 214.1 117.4 96.6 2.0 Feb.
10.7 15.9 1,041.0 502.1 538.9 370.9 168.1 0.0 408.7 192.8 215.9 118.1 97.7 2.6 Mar.
10.8 16.1 1,029.6 524.9 504.8 329.8 175.0 0.0 419.4 207.2 212.3 114.6 97.7 3.2 Apr.
10.8 16.0 1,034.0 554.2 479.7 315.8 163.9 0.0 420.7 212.0 208.7 109.3 99.4 4.0 May
10.6 16.0 1,033.2 549.6 483.6 315.3 168.3 0.0 414.4 204.4 210.1 111.0 99.0 4.5 June
10.5 16.0 992.6 510.2 482.4 311.4 170.9 0.0 402.9 191.4 211.5 112.3 99.3 4.8 July
Changes *
– 0.6 – 6.1 –15.4 +40.6 –56.0 –48.6 – 7.4 –0.0 –26.5 –13.9 –12.6 +0.3 –13.0 –0.0 2015
– 0.1 – 1.5 +82.7 +51.0 +31.7 +27.0 + 4.7 –0.0 +3.5 –3.1 +6.7 +5.9 +0.8 –0.0 2016
– 1.0 – 4.1 –15.5 +25.2 –40.8 –43.2 + 2.4 ±0.0 +31.8 +11.0 +20.8 +15.6 +5.2 –0.4 2017
– 0.2 – 2.2 –23.9 –23.4 – 0.4 + 2.1 – 2.6 –0.0 –11.9 –0.2 –11.8 –5.7 –6.0 –0.2 2018
– 0.3 – 0.9 – 9.5 –49.4 +39.8 +28.0 +11.8 –0.0 –0.8 +2.1 –2.9 –1.8 –1.1 –0.0 2019
– 0.2 – 3.9 +83.8 +87.8 – 4.1 –34.7 +30.6 – +23.6 +13.8 +9.8 +7.1 +2.8 +0.0 2020
– 0.2 – 0.8 +136.6 +19.8 +116.8 +89.2 +27.6 +0.0 +22.7 +6.4 +16.3 +0.0 +16.3 –0.0 2021
– 0.7 – 1.0 +85.8 +29.1 +56.7 +69.6 –13.0 –0.0 +68.2 +49.0 +19.2 +13.9 +5.3 +0.0 2022
+ 0.2 + 1.1 –66.1 –4.6 –61.4 –86.9 +25.4 ±0.0 +11.6 –18.3 +29.9 +20.9 +9.0 +0.1 2023
+ 0.0 + 0.2 – 7.0 –3.5 – 3.5 – 0.9 – 2.6 – +11.6 +4.1 +7.5 +7.2 +0.3 +0.1 2023 Feb.
+ 0.0 + 0.2 –21.8 –21.5 – 0.3 –13.9 +13.6 – –3.9 –0.8 –3.1 –10.0 +7.0 +0.1 Mar.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 –15.3 –34.3 +19.0 +15.2 + 3.8 – +11.7 –7.7 +19.3 +18.1 +1.2 –0.0 Apr.
+ 0.0 + 0.2 +10.1 +52.6 –42.5 –46.3 + 3.8 +0.0 +9.2 +9.5 –0.3 –1.2 +0.9 –0.0 May
– 0.2 – 0.0 –26.4 –26.1 – 0.3 + 3.9 – 4.2 – –23.1 –13.1 –9.9 –8.7 –1.2 +0.1 June
– 0.0 + 0.1 +27.3 +17.2 +10.1 + 9.0 + 1.1 – +0.4 –1.3 +1.7 +1.1 +0.6 –0.0 July
+ 0.0 – 0.0 –32.6 –16.4 –16.2 –17.9 + 1.7 –0.0 –4.3 –5.9 +1.6 +3.6 –2.0 –0.0 Aug.
– 0.0 – 0.0 –21.0 –32.3 +11.4 – 2.2 +13.5 – –5.7 +7.1 –12.8 –12.8 +0.0 +0.0 Sep.
+ 0.0 + 0.5 +17.0 +22.8 – 5.8 – 5.6 – 0.2 – +19.6 +0.9 +18.7 +17.3 +1.4 –0.1 Oct.
+ 0.2 – 0.1 –12.9 –18.4 + 5.5 + 4.9 + 0.6 – –8.6 +0.6 –9.2 –9.8 +0.6 –0.0 Nov.
+ 0.3 + 0.3 –77.4 –67.0 –10.4 – 2.3 – 8.2 – –31.3 –29.7 –1.5 –1.8 +0.3 –0.0 Dec.
+ 0.0 – 0.4 +51.4 +48.7 + 2.8 – 5.2 + 8.0 – +27.8 +23.6 +4.3 +5.3 –1.0 –0.4 2024 Jan.
+ 0.0 – 0.4 +46.4 +14.5 +31.9 +26.7 + 5.2 +0.0 +16.4 +11.5 +4.9 +6.8 –1.9 +1.4 Feb.
+ 0.0 – 0.0 +15.1 –32.4 +47.6 +59.5 –11.9 – –17.3 –19.1 +1.8 +0.7 +1.1 +0.5 Mar.
+ 0.0 + 0.1 –13.1 +22.2 –35.3 –41.9 + 6.6 – +10.1 +14.1 –4.0 –4.3 +0.3 +0.7 Apr.
– 0.0 – 0.0 + 7.1 +30.5 –23.5 –12.9 –10.6 – +2.3 +5.3 –3.0 –4.8 +1.8 +0.8 May
– 0.2 + 0.0 – 4.6 –6.3 + 1.8 – 1.9 + 3.6 – –7.5 –8.2 +0.7 +1.2 –0.5 +0.5 June
– 0.1 – 0.0 –35.8 –35.8 + 0.0 – 2.9 + 3.0 – –10.7 –12.6 +1.9 +1.6 +0.3 +0.3 July

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
30•
IV. Banks
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Short-term lending Medium- and long-term Lending to domestic
non-banks, total
to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
Periodincluding
negotiable
money market
paper, securities,
equalisation
claimsexcluding
negotiable
money market
paper, securities,
equalisation
claims Total TotalLoans
and
billsNegotiable
money
market
paper Total LoansTreasury
bills Total Total
End of year or month *
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2017 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
2018 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 – 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.8
2019 3,521.5 3,119.5 260.4 238.8 238.4 0.4 21.6 18.7 2.9 3,261.1 2,866.9
2020 3,647.0 3,245.3 243.3 221.6 221.2 0.4 21.6 18.0 3.6 3,403.8 3,013.0
2021 3,798.1 3,392.7 249.7 232.2 231.9 0.3 17.5 15.2 2.3 3,548.4 3,174.6
2022 4,015.6 3,613.3 296.4 279.8 279.4 0.4 16.7 14.3 2.3 3,719.2 3,359.9
2023 4,044.1 3,649.9 279.0 264.2 264.0 0.3 14.8 14.2 0.6 3,765.1 3,401.1
2023 Feb. 4,030.2 3,629.5 297.8 279.9 279.2 0.7 18.0 15.8 2.2 3,732.4 3,371.2
Mar. 4,030.5 3,634.8 305.0 285.1 284.4 0.7 19.9 16.3 3.6 3,725.5 3,369.3
Apr. 4,032.5 3,641.3 304.1 283.3 282.8 0.6 20.8 18.2 2.6 3,728.4 3,374.4
May 4,039.0 3,650.6 299.7 281.0 280.2 0.8 18.7 17.4 1.3 3,739.3 3,388.0
June 4,042.1 3,645.7 300.3 280.5 279.6 0.9 19.8 17.8 2.0 3,741.8 3,388.7
July 4,048.7 3,653.9 299.4 277.4 276.6 0.9 21.9 19.6 2.3 3,749.3 3,395.5
Aug. 4,046.7 3,650.0 289.5 270.8 270.1 0.7 18.6 16.8 1.8 3,757.2 3,398.6
Sep. 4,048.1 3,653.6 297.2 275.5 274.8 0.6 21.7 19.0 2.7 3,751.0 3,395.8
Oct. 4,051.9 3,656.7 293.6 270.9 270.3 0.6 22.7 20.3 2.4 3,758.3 3,401.0
Nov. 4,057.9 3,661.3 291.1 272.0 271.4 0.7 19.0 16.6 2.4 3,766.9 3,404.2
Dec. 4,044.1 3,649.9 279.0 264.2 264.0 0.3 14.8 14.2 0.6 3,765.1 3,401.1
2024 Jan. 4,048.3 3,649.5 281.0 263.3 262.7 0.6 17.7 16.8 0.8 3,767.3 3,401.5
Feb. 4,055.7 3,654.0 281.5 267.3 266.8 0.5 14.2 14.1 0.0 3,774.3 3,404.7
Mar. 4,061.0 3,658.5 289.2 273.3 272.6 0.7 15.9 16.1 – 0.2 3,771.8 3,403.2
Apr. 4,062.1 3,661.8 289.3 270.4 269.6 0.8 18.9 18.0 0.9 3,772.8 3,406.5
May 4,069.5 3,666.1 288.4 271.4 270.5 0.9 17.0 16.7 0.3 3,781.1 3,410.7
June 4,076.9 3,670.9 294.3 273.8 273.0 0.7 20.5 20.1 0.4 3,782.6 3,408.6
July 4,083.3 3,676.4 290.5 270.8 270.1 0.7 19.7 19.3 0.4 3,792.8 3,416.2
Changes *
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 – 1.3 – 0.9 – 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 – 5.2 – 0.3 – 0.4 + 0.1 – 4.9 – 4.8 – 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.8
2017 + 57.0 + 70.2 – 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 – 12.1 – 12.4 + 0.3 + 63.5 + 103.4
2018 + 71.5 + 105.3 + 6.6 + 15.8 + 15.7 + 0.1 – 9.2 – 8.6 – 0.6 + 65.0 + 102.0
2019 + 126.7 + 129.1 + 11.7 + 11.6 + 11.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 3.0 + 3.1 + 115.0 + 132.8
2020 + 123.2 + 123.6 – 19.6 – 19.8 – 19.8 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.7 + 142.8 + 145.6
2021 + 152.2 + 147.8 + 8.8 + 13.8 + 13.8 – 0.1 – 4.9 – 2.8 – 2.1 + 143.4 + 157.9
2022 + 216.7 + 220.0 + 47.6 + 48.5 + 48.5 + 0.0 – 0.9 – 0.9 + 0.0 + 169.1 + 184.8
2023 + 30.9 + 38.9 – 15.3 – 14.5 – 14.4 – 0.1 – 0.8 + 0.9 – 1.7 + 46.2 + 42.3
2023 Feb. + 13.3 + 6.3 – 6.0 – 3.2 – 3.3 + 0.1 – 2.8 – 1.2 – 1.6 + 19.3 + 11.0
Mar. + 0.9 + 6.0 + 7.6 + 5.7 + 5.7 – 0.0 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 1.4 – 6.7 – 1.8
Apr. + 2.1 + 6.5 – 0.9 – 1.7 – 1.7 – 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.9 – 1.1 + 3.0 + 5.1
May + 6.5 + 9.4 – 4.4 – 2.3 – 2.6 + 0.3 – 2.1 – 0.8 – 1.2 + 10.9 + 13.6
June + 4.4 – 3.7 + 1.7 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 2.7 + 0.9
July + 6.6 + 8.3 – 1.0 – 3.1 – 3.1 – 0.0 + 2.1 + 1.9 + 0.2 + 7.5 + 6.9
Aug. – 1.9 – 4.0 – 9.9 – 6.6 – 6.5 – 0.2 – 3.3 – 2.8 – 0.5 + 8.0 + 3.1
Sep. + 1.3 + 3.7 + 7.7 + 4.6 + 4.7 – 0.1 + 3.1 + 2.1 + 0.9 – 6.4 – 2.9
Oct. + 3.7 + 3.0 – 3.5 – 4.6 – 4.5 – 0.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 – 0.3 + 7.2 + 5.2
Nov. + 6.1 + 4.7 – 2.3 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.1 – 3.7 – 3.7 + 0.0 + 8.4 + 3.8
Dec. – 12.7 – 10.3 – 11.0 – 7.8 – 7.4 – 0.4 – 3.2 – 1.3 – 1.8 – 1.7 – 2.9
2024 Jan. + 4.0 – 0.5 + 1.9 – 0.9 – 1.2 + 0.3 + 2.8 + 2.6 + 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.3
Feb. + 6.7 + 3.7 + 0.4 + 3.9 + 4.0 – 0.1 – 3.5 – 2.7 – 0.8 + 6.3 + 2.7
Mar. + 5.3 + 4.4 + 6.6 + 4.8 + 4.7 + 0.2 + 1.7 + 2.0 – 0.2 – 1.3 – 0.3
Apr. + 1.1 + 3.3 + 0.1 – 2.8 – 3.0 + 0.2 + 3.0 + 1.9 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 3.4
May + 7.4 + 4.3 – 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.0 – 1.9 – 1.3 – 0.6 + 8.3 + 4.3
June + 7.4 + 4.9 + 5.9 + 2.4 + 2.5 – 0.1 + 3.5 + 3.4 + 0.1 + 1.6 – 2.1
July + 6.9 + 5.9 – 3.4 – 2.5 – 2.5 – 0.0 – 0.8 – 0.8 – 0.0 + 10.2 + 7.7
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims (see also
footnote 2).  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation
claims.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
31•
IV. Banks
lending
prises and households to general government
Loans Loans
TotalMedium-
termLong-
term SecuritiesMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total TotalMedium-
termLong-
termSecur-
ities  1Equal-
isation
claims  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
2,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 – 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 – 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 – 1.8 2016
2,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 – 1.7 2017
2,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 – 1.4 2018
2,626.4 301.3 2,325.1 240.5 15.7 394.2 235.9 17.2 218.8 158.2 – 1.5 2019
2,771.8 310.5 2,461.4 241.1 22.4 390.8 234.3 15.7 218.6 156.6 – 1.1 2020
2,915.7 314.5 2,601.2 258.9 24.7 373.8 229.9 14.3 215.6 143.9 – 1.0 2021
3,085.9 348.7 2,737.1 274.0 24.6 359.3 233.7 14.1 219.6 125.6 – 1.0 2022
3,131.7 361.0 2,770.7 269.4 22.8 364.0 240.0 14.1 225.9 124.0 – 1.0 2023
3,102.0 355.3 2,746.7 269.2 24.5 361.2 232.5 13.7 218.8 128.7 – 1.1 2023 Feb.
3,101.5 354.8 2,746.7 267.8 23.6 356.2 232.6 13.6 219.0 123.6 – 1.0 Mar.
3,107.6 355.6 2,752.0 266.8 23.6 354.0 232.7 13.9 218.8 121.2 – 1.0 Apr.
3,120.7 360.8 2,760.0 267.2 23.7 351.4 232.4 13.6 218.8 119.0 – 1.0 May
3,117.4 360.0 2,757.5 271.3 23.3 353.1 230.9 13.4 217.6 122.2 – 1.0 June
3,125.3 362.1 2,763.3 270.2 23.4 353.8 232.4 13.5 218.9 121.4 – 1.0 July
3,130.4 362.8 2,767.6 268.2 23.4 358.6 232.6 13.8 218.8 126.0 – 1.0 Aug.
3,126.8 359.5 2,767.3 269.0 23.2 355.1 233.0 13.7 219.4 122.1 – 1.0 Sep.
3,131.2 360.7 2,770.5 269.8 23.1 357.3 234.8 13.8 221.0 122.4 – 1.0 Oct.
3,135.5 361.4 2,774.1 268.7 23.0 362.7 237.8 14.1 223.8 124.8 – 1.0 Nov.
3,131.7 361.0 2,770.7 269.4 22.8 364.0 240.0 14.1 225.9 124.0 – 1.0 Dec.
3,130.5 359.5 2,771.0 271.0 22.7 365.8 239.4 13.8 225.6 126.4 – 1.0 2024 Jan.
3,132.4 357.0 2,775.4 272.3 22.7 369.6 240.7 14.1 226.6 128.9 – 1.0 Feb.
3,128.6 354.1 2,774.5 274.6 22.5 368.7 241.1 14.3 226.8 127.5 – 1.0 Mar.
3,132.3 353.4 2,779.0 274.2 22.4 366.3 241.9 14.3 227.5 124.4 – 1.0 Apr.
3,135.9 353.3 2,782.6 274.8 22.4 370.4 242.9 14.5 228.4 127.5 – 1.0 May
3,135.3 352.3 2,783.1 273.3 22.2 374.0 242.5 14.6 227.8 131.5 – 1.0 June
3,143.2 355.5 2,787.6 273.1 22.1 376.6 243.8 15.0 228.9 132.7 – 1.0 July
Changes *
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 +14.8 – 2.1 – 6.6 – 6.9 – 4.8 – 2.0 + 0.2 – + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 – 0.9 – 30.9 – 7.3 – 4.0 – 3.3 –23.6 – – 0.4 2016
+ 87.6 + 9.4 + 78.2 +15.8 + 0.1 – 39.9 –10.6 – 1.3 – 9.3 –29.4 – – 0.1 2017
+108.7 +19.3 + 89.4 – 6.7 – 0.9 – 37.1 –10.5 – 2.7 – 7.8 –26.6 – – 0.0 2018
+126.0 +18.9 +107.2 + 6.8 – 0.8 – 17.8 – 5.5 – 2.6 – 2.9 –12.3 – + 0.1 2019
+145.0 + 9.4 +135.5 + 0.6 + 6.1 – 2.8 – 1.1 – 1.5 + 0.4 – 1.7 – – 0.4 2020
+140.1 + 5.6 +134.5 +17.8 + 2.3 – 14.6 – 3.3 – 1.3 – 2.0 –11.3 – – 0.0 2021
+169.9 +33.5 +136.4 +14.9 – 0.1 – 15.7 + 2.5 – 0.7 + 3.3 –18.2 – – 0.0 2022
+ 46.9 +11.0 + 35.9 – 4.7 – 1.1 + 3.9 + 5.5 ± 0.0 + 5.5 – 1.5 – – 0.0 2023
+ 11.7 + 5.4 + 6.4 – 0.7 – 0.1 + 8.3 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.7 + 9.2 – + 0.1 2023 Feb.
– 0.4 – 0.5 + 0.0 – 1.4 – 0.3 – 4.8 + 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.3 – 5.1 – – 0.0 Mar.
+ 6.1 + 0.8 + 5.3 – 1.0 + 0.0 – 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 – 0.2 – 2.3 – + 0.0 Apr.
+ 13.2 + 5.2 + 8.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 – 2.7 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 2.3 – – 0.0 May
– 3.2 – 1.3 – 2.0 + 4.1 – 0.3 + 1.8 – 1.5 – 0.2 – 1.2 + 3.2 – – 0.0 June
+ 8.0 + 1.8 + 6.2 – 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 1.3 – 0.8 – – 0.0 July
+ 5.1 + 0.8 + 4.3 – 2.0 + 0.1 + 4.8 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.1 + 4.6 – – 0.0 Aug.
– 3.6 – 3.3 – 0.2 + 0.7 – 0.2 – 3.5 + 0.4 – 0.2 + 0.6 – 3.9 – – 0.0 Sep.
+ 4.4 + 1.1 + 3.2 + 0.8 – 0.1 + 2.1 + 1.8 + 0.2 + 1.6 + 0.3 – – 0.0 Oct.
+ 4.8 + 0.2 + 4.6 – 1.1 – 0.1 + 4.7 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 2.0 + 2.4 – + 0.0 Nov.
– 3.5 – 0.4 – 3.2 + 0.7 – 0.2 + 1.1 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 1.9 – 0.9 – – 0.0 Dec.
– 1.3 – 1.4 + 0.1 + 1.6 – 0.1 + 1.8 – 0.6 – 0.3 – 0.3 + 2.4 – + 0.0 2024 Jan.
+ 1.4 – 2.5 + 4.0 + 1.3 – + 3.5 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 2.5 – – 0.0 Feb.
– 2.6 – 2.5 – 0.1 + 2.3 – 0.2 – 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 1.4 – + 0.0 Mar.
+ 3.7 – 0.8 + 4.5 – 0.4 – 0.1 – 2.4 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.7 – 3.1 – + 0.0 Apr.
+ 3.8 – 0.1 + 3.8 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 4.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 3.1 – + 0.0 May
– 0.6 – 1.1 + 0.5 – 1.4 – 0.2 + 3.6 – 0.4 + 0.2 – 0.6 + 4.0 – – 0.0 June
+ 7.9 + 3.3 + 4.6 – 0.2 – 0.1 + 2.6 + 1.3 + 0.3 + 1.0 + 1.3 – – 0.0 July

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
32•
IV. Banks
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
billion €
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios)  1
of which:
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
Period TotalMortgage
loans,
total TotalMortgage
loans
secured
by
residen-
tial real
estateOther
housing
loans Totalof which:
Housing
loansManufac-
turingElectricity,
gas and
water
supply;
refuse
disposal,          
mining
and
quarryingConstruc-
tionWhole-
sale and
retail
trade;
repair of
motor                
vehicles
and
motor-
cyclesAgri-
culture,
forestry,
fishing
and
aqua-
cultureTransport-
ation and
storage;
post and                      
telecom-
munica-
tionsFinancial
intermedi-
ation
(excluding
MFIs) and
insurance   
com-
panies
Lending, total                                                 End of year or quarter *
2022 3,365.3 1,676.5 1,773.9 1,448.0 325.8 1,852.2 509.1 160.0 137.7 108.8 155.1 56.3 65.2 211.9
2023 Q2 3,397.0 1,701.4 1,787.6 1,471.4 316.3 1,879.4 517.7 162.6 137.7 112.5 159.2 56.3 61.9 221.5
Q3 3,401.6 1,735.7 1,797.1 1,505.7 291.5 1,878.2 522.3 160.0 134.7 113.3 159.5 56.4 61.3 223.0
Q4 3,395.7 1,740.5 1,801.7 1,512.0 289.7 1,872.8 525.7 154.6 136.1 113.3 160.2 56.0 61.5 218.1
2024 Q1 3,401.2 1,753.5 1,802.8 1,524.4 278.5 1,879.2 527.2 155.3 138.3 113.5 159.4 56.3 58.7 219.4
Q2 3,408.4 1,762.5 1,808.4 1,531.5 276.9 1,884.0 529.6 155.7 143.8 114.1 159.0 56.4 52.0 219.2
Short-term lending
2022 279.4 . 7.4 . 7.4 248.9 5.0 41.6 12.1 20.8 44.7 3.3 3.8 49.8
2023 Q2 279.6 . 7.6 . 7.6 248.9 5.4 42.3 7.7 22.6 46.8 3.8 3.6 50.4
Q3 274.8 . 7.5 . 7.5 244.4 5.4 40.4 5.6 22.6 47.2 3.8 3.8 51.3
Q4 264.0 . 7.4 . 7.4 233.9 5.3 37.2 5.1 22.2 46.8 3.5 4.5 47.2
2024 Q1 272.6 . 7.6 . 7.6 243.4 5.6 39.7 6.2 23.1 48.0 4.0 4.6 48.2
Q2 273.0 . 7.5 . 7.5 244.4 5.5 40.4 6.2 23.3 48.0 4.1 4.4 47.0
Medium-term lending
2022 348.7 . 43.4 . 43.4 275.8 23.5 31.2 6.5 22.2 24.3 4.1 23.0 56.2
2023 Q2 360.0 . 42.8 . 42.8 289.3 24.1 34.0 8.0 22.8 26.9 4.1 19.1 61.3
Q3 359.5 . 42.8 . 42.8 289.2 24.5 34.7 5.8 23.0 26.9 4.1 18.2 62.5
Q4 361.0 . 41.9 . 41.9 291.2 24.3 34.0 6.0 23.1 28.2 4.2 18.6 61.3
2024 Q1 354.1 . 40.8 . 40.8 285.1 24.1 32.9 5.8 22.5 27.3 4.1 15.6 61.6
Q2 352.3 . 40.0 . 40.0 284.1 23.8 33.2 11.0 22.1 27.5 4.2 9.4 61.4
Long-term lending
2022 2,737.1 1,676.5 1,723.1 1,448.0 275.1 1,327.5 480.6 87.2 119.0 65.8 86.1 48.9 38.4 105.9
2023 Q2 2,757.5 1,701.4 1,737.2 1,471.4 265.9 1,341.2 488.2 86.3 122.1 67.1 85.5 48.5 39.2 109.7
Q3 2,767.3 1,735.7 1,746.8 1,505.7 241.2 1,344.7 492.4 85.0 123.3 67.7 85.3 48.5 39.2 109.1
Q4 2,770.7 1,740.5 1,752.5 1,512.0 240.5 1,347.7 496.1 83.4 125.1 68.0 85.2 48.3 38.5 109.7
2024 Q1 2,774.5 1,753.5 1,754.4 1,524.4 230.1 1,350.7 497.5 82.8 126.3 68.0 84.1 48.1 38.5 109.7
Q2 2,783.1 1,762.5 1,760.9 1,531.5 229.4 1,355.5 500.3 82.0 126.7 68.7 83.5 48.1 38.2 110.8
Lending, total                                                 Change during quarter *
2023 Q2 +12.4 +11.5 + 9.1 +11.5 – 2.4 + 8.2 + 5.3 – 0.1 – 0.4 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 0.2 – 0.9 – 0.2
Q3 + 4.7 +10.9 + 9.2 +11.2 – 2.0 – 1.4 + 4.2 – 2.5 – 2.9 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 – 0.6 + 1.3
Q4 – 4.9 + 5.6 + 4.8 + 7.0 – 2.2 – 4.6 + 3.4 – 5.5 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.7 – 0.5 + 0.7 – 4.9
2024 Q1 + 4.9 + 6.5 + 1.9 + 7.7 – 5.8 + 5.8 + 2.2 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 0.3 – 1.0 + 0.3 – 2.7 + 1.3
Q2 + 7.3 + 8.9 + 5.6 + 7.1 – 1.6 + 4.5 + 2.2 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.6 – 0.7 + 0.1 – 1.6 – 0.4
Short-term lending
2023 Q2 – 3.7 . – 0.0 . – 0.0 – 3.6 + 0.1 – 1.1 – 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.0 – 2.4
Q3 – 4.8 . – 0.1 . – 0.1 – 4.7 – 0.0 – 1.9 – 2.1 – 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.9
Q4 –10.6 . – 0.2 . – 0.2 –10.2 – 0.1 – 3.1 – 0.7 – 0.4 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.7 – 4.1
2024 Q1 + 7.4 . + 0.2 . + 0.2 + 8.4 + 0.2 + 2.4 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 1.0
Q2 + 0.5 . – 0.0 . – 0.0 + 1.0 – 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.1 – 1.3
Medium-term lending
2023 Q2 + 4.7 . – 0.0 . – 0.0 + 5.4 + 0.4 + 1.6 – 1.3 + 0.4 + 2.0 – 0.0 – 1.6 + 2.1
Q3 – 0.8 . – 0.2 . – 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.7 – 2.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.9 + 1.1
Q4 + 1.0 . – 0.8 . – 0.8 + 1.7 – 0.3 – 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 – 1.3
2024 Q1 – 6.5 . – 1.2 . – 1.2 – 5.7 – 0.4 – 1.1 – 0.2 – 0.6 – 0.8 – 0.0 – 2.9 + 0.4
Q2 – 2.0 . – 0.8 . – 0.8 – 1.3 – 0.3 + 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 – 1.0 – 0.3
Long-term lending
2023 Q2 +11.3 +11.5 + 9.1 +11.5 – 2.4 + 6.4 + 4.8 – 0.6 + 1.3 + 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.1
Q3 +10.3 +10.9 + 9.5 +11.2 – 1.7 + 3.8 + 4.0 – 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.6 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.6
Q4 + 4.7 + 5.6 + 5.7 + 7.0 – 1.3 + 3.9 + 3.8 – 1.6 + 1.8 + 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.3 + 0.6
2024 Q1 + 4.0 + 6.5 + 2.9 + 7.7 – 4.7 + 3.1 + 2.4 – 0.6 + 1.0 + 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.2
Q2 + 8.9 + 8.9 + 6.4 + 7.1 – 0.7 + 4.7 + 2.6 – 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.7 – 0.7 – 0.0 – 0.4 + 1.1
* Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical breaks have been eliminatedfrom the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
visional; subsequent alterations, which appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
33•
IV. Banks
Lending to employees and other individualsLending to
non-profit institutions
Services sector (including the professions) Memo items: Other lending
of which: of which:
TotalHousing
enterprisesHolding
companiesOther
real
estate
activitiesLending
to self-
employed
persons  2Lending
to craft
enterprises TotalHousing
loans TotalInstalment
loans  3Debit
balances
on wage,
salary
and
pension
accounts Totalof which:
Housing
loans   Period
End of year or quarter *                                   Lending, total
957.4 334.0 79.9 218.2 501.7 54.1 1,495.8 1,260.1 235.7 185.9 7.1 17.3 4.6 2022
967.7 340.4 78.1 220.8 504.3 55.0 1,500.1 1,265.2 234.9 186.0 7.3 17.5 4.7 2023 Q2
970.0 344.0 76.3 222.5 505.0 54.6 1,505.9 1,270.1 235.7 186.9 7.3 17.5 4.7 Q3
973.0 346.8 75.8 223.7 504.8 54.3 1,505.7 1,271.3 234.4 185.6 7.1 17.2 4.7 Q4
978.2 348.4 78.2 222.6 505.4 55.0 1,505.1 1,271.0 234.1 186.1 7.0 17.0 4.6 2024 Q1
983.7 351.7 77.1 222.5 506.4 55.0 1,507.5 1,274.2 233.3 186.4 7.0 16.9 4.7 Q2
Short-term lending
73.0 16.1 15.6 10.8 20.4 5.0 29.9 2.4 27.5 1.7 7.1 0.6 –2022
71.7 16.5 14.2 11.0 21.0 6.7 30.1 2.2 27.9 2.3 7.3 0.6 –2023 Q2
69.7 16.2 13.2 11.6 20.6 6.5 29.9 2.1 27.8 2.2 7.3 0.6 – Q3
67.4 16.0 12.6 11.3 20.6 5.7 29.5 2.1 27.5 2.2 7.1 0.6 0.0 Q4
69.7 15.1 14.5 11.4 20.9 6.9 28.8 2.0 26.8 1.9 7.0 0.5 0.0 2024 Q1
70.9 15.3 14.1 11.3 20.7 7.2 28.1 2.1 26.1 2.0 7.0 0.5 0.0 Q2
Medium-term lending
108.2 25.4 20.1 28.4 30.1 6.5 72.3 19.8 52.5 48.0 . 0.6 0.1 2022
113.1 25.9 22.0 29.5 30.9 6.2 70.1 18.6 51.5 46.9 . 0.6 0.1 2023 Q2
113.9 26.5 20.8 30.9 31.1 6.2 69.7 18.2 51.5 46.9 . 0.6 0.1 Q3
115.9 26.0 21.4 32.2 31.2 6.4 69.4 17.5 51.8 47.1 . 0.4 0.1 Q4
115.3 25.9 21.1 31.7 31.0 6.1 68.6 16.7 51.9 47.0 . 0.4 0.1 2024 Q1
115.3 25.4 21.1 31.9 31.0 6.1 67.7 16.2 51.6 46.6 . 0.4 0.1 Q2
Long-term lending
776.2 292.6 44.2 179.0 451.1 42.6 1,393.5 1,237.9 155.6 136.2 . 16.1 4.6 2022
782.8 298.0 41.9 180.3 452.3 42.1 1,399.9 1,244.4 155.5 136.8 . 16.3 4.6 2023 Q2
786.5 301.3 42.3 180.0 453.3 41.9 1,406.3 1,249.8 156.4 137.8 . 16.4 4.6 Q3
789.7 304.8 41.8 180.1 453.0 42.3 1,406.8 1,251.7 155.1 136.3 . 16.2 4.6 Q4
793.2 307.3 42.6 179.5 453.5 41.9 1,407.7 1,252.3 155.4 137.2 . 16.0 4.6 2024 Q1
797.5 311.0 41.9 179.2 454.7 41.7 1,411.6 1,255.9 155.7 137.8 . 16.0 4.6 Q2
Change during quarter *                                    Lending, total
+ 6.2 + 4.1 – 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 3.8 + 0.3 + 0.5 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 2023 Q2
+ 2.1 + 3.5 – 1.8 + 1.7 + 0.5 – 0.4 + 6.0 + 5.0 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 Q3
+ 3.4 + 2.7 – 0.4 + 1.3 – 0.4 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 1.3 – 1.3 – 1.3 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 Q4
+ 5.0 + 1.3 + 2.4 – 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.4 + 0.8 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.1 2024 Q1
+ 5.5 + 3.1 – 1.1 + 1.7 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 2.9 + 3.4 – 0.5 + 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.0 Q2
Short-term lending
– 1.0 + 0.0 – 0.8 – 0.6 – 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.0 –2023 Q2
– 2.3 – 0.3 – 1.0 + 0.5 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 – Q3
– 2.0 – 0.2 – 0.6 – 0.2 + 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.3 + 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.0 Q4
+ 2.3 – 0.9 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.2 – 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.8 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 –2024 Q1
+ 1.3 + 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.6 + 0.1 – 0.7 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 Q2
Medium-term lending
+ 2.3 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.7 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.4 . + 0.0 – 0.0 2023 Q2
+ 0.5 + 0.6 – 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.4 – 0.4 + 0.1 – 0.1 . + 0.1 – 0.0 Q3
+ 2.0 – 0.5 + 0.6 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.0 – 0.2 . – 0.2 + 0.0 Q4
– 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.8 – 0.8 + 0.1 – 0.1 . – – 0.0 2024 Q1
– 0.0 – 0.5 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.7 – 0.5 – 0.2 – 0.2 . + 0.0 – 0.0 Q2
Long-term lending
+ 4.9 + 3.4 – 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.6 – 0.1 + 4.8 + 4.3 + 0.5 + 0.7 . + 0.1 + 0.0 2023 Q2
+ 3.9 + 3.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.9 – 0.2 + 6.4 + 5.5 + 0.9 + 1.0 . + 0.0 + 0.0 Q3
+ 3.3 + 3.5 – 0.3 + 0.2 – 0.5 – 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.9 – 1.0 – 1.2 . – 0.1 – 0.0 Q4
+ 3.2 + 2.3 + 0.8 – 0.6 + 0.4 – 0.3 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 1.0 . – 0.2 – 0.1 2024 Q1
+ 4.3 + 3.4 – 0.7 + 1.6 + 1.0 – 0.2 + 4.2 + 3.8 + 0.4 + 0.8 . – 0.1 + 0.0 Q2
are not specially marked.  1 Excluding fiduciary loans.  2 Including sole proprietors. 3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
34•
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year  2
PeriodDeposits,
totalSight
deposits Totalfor up
to and
including
1 year Totalfor up
to and
including
2 yearsfor more
than
2 yearsSavings
deposits  3Bank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)Liabilities
arising
from repos
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
2021 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 161.0 574.9 49.7 525.2 561.2 24.5 34.2 17.1 1.3
2022 4,162.0 2,720.6 873.5 314.8 558.7 50.5 508.2 533.2 34.6 35.9 18.5 3.9
2023 4,229.0 2,540.8 1,100.1 514.7 585.4 80.5 504.9 445.9 142.2 50.1 20.3 2.9
2023 Aug. 4,188.4 2,568.4 1,061.7 490.2 571.6 67.3 504.3 467.5 90.7 36.9 19.9 4.7
Sep. 4,189.3 2,558.0 1,072.5 497.7 574.8 71.5 503.3 461.8 97.0 37.1 19.9 6.5
Oct. 4,198.0 2,544.5 1,086.5 510.9 575.6 74.6 501.0 455.4 111.6 37.3 19.9 6.3
Nov. 4,217.3 2,552.9 1,085.6 506.9 578.6 76.7 501.9 448.3 130.5 37.6 20.8 6.4
Dec. 4,229.0 2,540.8 1,100.1 514.7 585.4 80.5 504.9 445.9 142.2 50.1 20.3 2.9
2024 Jan. 4,216.3 2,496.8 1,128.7 540.7 588.0 84.3 503.8 439.4 151.4 54.5 20.4 4.9
Feb. 4,213.6 2,478.3 1,143.5 555.4 588.1 85.1 503.0 434.4 157.3 57.5 20.4 5.0
Mar. 4,239.0 2,479.2 1,168.8 578.6 590.2 87.3 502.9 430.3 160.7 60.2 20.3 4.5
Apr. 4,239.6 2,475.4 1,173.6 584.9 588.8 84.9 503.8 425.8 164.8 63.7 20.3 4.4
May 4,263.3 2,497.0 1,176.9 587.4 589.5 85.1 504.3 422.2 167.2 66.9 20.4 4.8
June 4,264.7 2,494.2 1,182.5 591.0 591.5 86.7 504.8 418.1 170.0 68.9 20.4 4.5
July 4,267.9 2,497.1 1,185.3 594.6 590.6 86.4 504.3 414.0 171.5 70.0 20.4 5.1
Changes *
2022 +191.8 + 65.8 +143.4 +152.5 – 9.1 + 0.6 – 9.7 –27.5 +10.1 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 2.6
2023 + 76.6 –172.0 +226.4 +198.4 +28.0 +29.9 – 1.9 –82.3 +104.5 + 3.5 + 1.8 – 1.0
2023 Aug. + 8.2 – 13.2 + 21.3 + 21.3 + 0.0 + 1.9 – 1.8 – 8.5 + 8.5 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.2
Sep. + 0.9 – 10.5 + 10.7 + 8.0 + 2.7 + 3.9 – 1.2 – 5.7 + 6.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.8
Oct. + 8.7 – 13.4 + 14.0 + 13.2 + 0.8 + 3.1 – 2.3 – 6.4 +14.6 + 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.2
Nov. + 19.3 + 8.5 – 1.0 – 4.1 + 3.1 + 2.1 + 0.9 – 7.1 +18.8 + 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.2
Dec. + 22.3 – 0.7 + 13.7 + 7.7 + 6.0 + 4.0 + 2.0 – 2.5 +11.8 + 1.2 – 0.4 – 3.5
2024 Jan. – 12.7 – 44.1 + 28.7 + 26.1 + 2.6 + 3.8 – 1.1 – 6.5 + 9.2 + 4.4 + 0.0 + 2.0
Feb. – 2.8 – 18.4 + 14.8 + 14.7 + 0.1 + 0.8 – 0.8 – 5.0 + 5.9 + 3.0 – 0.0 + 0.1
Mar. + 25.5 + 0.9 + 25.3 + 23.2 + 2.1 + 2.2 – 0.2 – 4.1 + 3.4 + 2.6 – 0.1 – 0.5
Apr. + 0.6 – 3.8 + 4.8 + 6.3 – 1.4 – 2.4 + 1.0 – 4.6 + 4.2 + 3.5 + 0.1 – 0.1
May + 23.7 + 21.7 + 3.1 + 2.4 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.5 – 3.5 + 2.4 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 0.4
June – 0.4 – 2.7 + 3.7 + 3.6 + 0.2 + 1.6 – 1.4 – 4.2 + 2.8 + 2.0 + 0.0 – 0.3
July + 3.1 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 3.7 – 0.8 – 0.3 – 0.6 – 4.0 + 1.5 + 1.1 – 0.0 + 0.6
Domestic government End of year or month *
2021 210.1 82.4 121.9 42.0 79.9 23.8 56.1 2.5 3.3 25.8 2.0 1.0
2022 279.8 82.5 191.6 106.8 84.9 23.1 61.7 2.0 3.7 27.3 1.9 2.4
2023 286.9 91.2 190.5 105.6 84.9 23.3 61.6 0.9 4.4 26.6 1.4 0.2
2023 Aug. 305.6 95.1 205.4 119.3 86.1 22.8 63.3 1.0 4.1 26.6 1.9 2.2
Sep. 304.9 94.2 205.6 119.5 86.2 23.9 62.2 0.9 4.2 26.4 1.8 3.8
Oct. 291.0 92.3 193.5 108.0 85.6 23.5 62.0 0.9 4.2 26.2 1.8 2.9
Nov. 285.2 92.5 187.5 103.7 83.8 22.1 61.7 0.9 4.4 26.0 1.8 2.2
Dec. 286.9 91.2 190.5 105.6 84.9 23.3 61.6 0.9 4.4 26.6 1.4 0.2
2024 Jan. 272.5 84.9 182.5 98.4 84.1 23.4 60.7 0.8 4.3 26.5 1.3 1.0
Feb. 276.6 87.8 183.7 101.4 82.4 21.0 61.3 0.8 4.3 26.7 1.3 1.2
Mar. 283.2 89.0 189.1 106.1 83.0 22.0 61.1 0.8 4.3 26.9 1.3 1.3
Apr. 266.2 81.6 179.4 99.9 79.5 18.7 60.8 0.8 4.4 26.9 1.3 0.3
May 274.8 92.1 177.5 98.4 79.1 18.4 60.7 0.7 4.5 27.0 1.3 0.8
June 284.5 95.3 184.1 104.9 79.2 19.4 59.8 0.7 4.4 26.8 1.3 0.9
July 264.1 81.0 178.2 99.2 79.1 19.4 59.6 0.6 4.2 26.6 1.3 0.9
Changes *
2022 + 69.1 + 0.2 + 69.2 + 64.7 + 4.5 – 0.9 + 5.4 – 0.6 + 0.3 + 1.5 – 0.1 + 1.4
2023 + 6.5 + 8.7 – 1.7 – 1.7 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 1.1 + 0.6 + 0.1 – 0.6 – 2.2
2023 Aug. + 7.3 + 9.3 – 2.1 – 1.8 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 1.4
Sep. – 0.7 – 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 1.2 – 1.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 1.6
Oct. – 14.0 – 1.9 – 12.2 – 11.5 – 0.6 – 0.4 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.9
Nov. – 5.8 + 0.2 – 6.2 – 4.4 – 1.8 – 1.4 – 0.4 – 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.7
Dec. + 1.7 – 1.3 + 2.9 + 1.9 + 1.1 + 1.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.7 – 0.4 – 2.0
2024 Jan. – 14.4 – 6.3 – 8.0 – 7.2 – 0.8 + 0.1 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.8
Feb. + 4.1 + 2.9 + 1.2 + 3.0 – 1.8 – 2.4 + 0.6 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.3
Mar. + 6.6 + 1.2 + 5.4 + 4.7 + 0.7 + 0.9 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.1
Apr. – 17.0 – 7.3 – 9.7 – 6.2 – 3.5 – 3.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 1.0
May + 8.6 + 10.5 – 1.9 – 1.5 – 0.5 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.5
June + 9.6 + 3.2 + 6.5 + 6.5 + 0.1 + 1.0 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.1
July – 20.4 – 14.3 – 5.9 – 5.7 – 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.0 –
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt securities.
2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  3 Excluding
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
35•
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont´d)
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year  2
PeriodDeposits,
totalSight
deposits Totalfor up
to and
including
1 year Totalfor up
to and
including
2 yearsfor more
than
2 yearsSavings
deposits  3Bank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)Liabilities
arising
from repos
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month *
2021 3,766.2 2,572.2 614.1 119.0 495.0 25.9 469.2 558.7 21.2 8.4 15.1 0.3
2022 3,882.2 2,638.1 681.9 208.0 473.9 27.4 446.5 531.2 31.0 8.6 16.6 1.5
2023 3,942.1 2,449.6 909.6 409.1 500.5 57.2 443.3 445.0 137.9 23.5 19.0 2.7
2023 Aug. 3,882.8 2,473.4 856.4 370.9 485.5 44.5 441.0 466.5 86.6 10.3 18.0 2.4
Sep. 3,884.4 2,463.8 866.9 378.3 488.6 47.5 441.1 460.9 92.9 10.7 18.1 2.7
Oct. 3,907.1 2,452.2 892.9 402.9 490.0 51.0 439.0 454.5 107.4 11.2 18.1 3.4
Nov. 3,932.1 2,460.5 898.0 403.2 494.8 54.5 440.3 447.5 126.1 11.6 19.0 4.2
Dec. 3,942.1 2,449.6 909.6 409.1 500.5 57.2 443.3 445.0 137.9 23.5 19.0 2.7
2024 Jan. 3,943.8 2,411.9 946.2 442.3 503.9 60.8 443.1 438.6 147.1 28.0 19.1 4.0
Feb. 3,937.0 2,390.6 959.8 454.0 505.8 64.1 441.7 433.6 153.0 30.9 19.0 3.8
Mar. 3,955.8 2,390.3 979.6 472.5 507.2 65.4 441.8 429.6 156.4 33.2 19.0 3.1
Apr. 3,973.4 2,393.8 994.2 485.0 509.2 66.2 443.0 425.0 160.5 36.8 19.0 4.1
May 3,988.5 2,404.8 999.4 489.0 510.4 66.7 443.7 421.5 162.7 39.9 19.1 4.1
June 3,980.3 2,398.9 998.4 486.1 512.3 67.3 445.0 417.4 165.6 42.1 19.2 3.7
July 4,003.8 2,416.1 1,007.0 495.5 511.6 66.9 444.6 413.4 167.2 43.4 19.2 4.3
Changes *
2022 +122.7 + 65.6 + 74.2 + 87.8 –13.6 + 1.4 –15.1 –27.0 + 9.8 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.3
2023 + 70.0 –180.7 +228.1 +200.1 +28.1 +29.8 – 1.7 –81.2 +103.8 + 3.5 + 2.4 + 1.2
2023 Aug. + 0.9 – 22.5 + 23.4 + 23.1 + 0.4 + 2.1 – 1.8 – 8.4 + 8.4 + 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.3
Sep. + 1.6 – 9.6 + 10.5 + 7.9 + 2.6 + 2.7 – 0.1 – 5.6 + 6.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2
Oct. + 22.7 – 11.6 + 26.1 + 24.7 + 1.5 + 3.5 – 2.0 – 6.4 +14.5 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.7
Nov. + 25.1 + 8.3 + 5.2 + 0.4 + 4.8 + 3.5 + 1.3 – 7.0 +18.7 + 0.5 + 0.9 + 0.9
Dec. + 20.7 + 0.6 + 10.8 + 5.9 + 4.9 + 2.8 + 2.1 – 2.4 +11.8 + 0.5 + 0.0 – 1.5
2024 Jan. + 1.7 – 37.8 + 36.7 + 33.3 + 3.4 + 3.7 – 0.2 – 6.5 + 9.2 + 4.5 + 0.1 + 1.2
Feb. – 6.8 – 21.3 + 13.6 + 11.7 + 1.9 + 3.3 – 1.4 – 5.0 + 5.9 + 2.8 – 0.0 – 0.2
Mar. + 18.9 – 0.3 + 19.9 + 18.4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.1 – 4.1 + 3.4 + 2.4 – 0.1 – 0.6
Apr. + 17.6 + 3.5 + 14.6 + 12.5 + 2.0 + 0.8 + 1.2 – 4.6 + 4.1 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 1.0
May + 15.0 + 11.3 + 5.0 + 3.9 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.6 – 3.5 + 2.3 + 3.1 + 0.1 – 0.0
June – 10.0 – 5.9 – 2.8 – 2.9 + 0.1 + 0.6 – 0.5 – 4.1 + 2.8 + 2.2 + 0.0 – 0.4
July + 23.5 + 17.2 + 8.7 + 9.3 – 0.7 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 4.0 + 1.6 + 1.4 – 0.0 + 0.6
of which: Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2021 1,142.7 765.1 364.3 87.4 276.9 15.8 261.1 5.3 8.0 2.3 12.2 0.3
2022 1,193.5 783.4 397.1 140.8 256.3 16.8 239.5 4.4 8.6 1.9 13.5 1.5
2023 1,194.6 723.0 453.9 204.3 249.6 19.0 230.6 3.3 14.4 2.5 15.5 2.7
2023 Aug. 1,189.2 719.9 452.0 202.1 249.9 18.0 231.9 3.7 13.6 2.2 14.6 2.4
Sep. 1,187.8 719.1 451.5 200.9 250.6 18.7 231.9 3.6 13.6 2.2 14.6 2.7
Oct. 1,209.6 727.6 464.5 215.8 248.7 19.2 229.5 3.5 14.0 2.3 14.6 3.4
Nov. 1,213.9 738.9 457.4 208.5 248.9 19.0 229.8 3.5 14.2 2.3 15.5 4.2
Dec. 1,194.6 723.0 453.9 204.3 249.6 19.0 230.6 3.3 14.4 2.5 15.5 2.7
2024 Jan. 1,203.8 714.6 471.4 223.4 248.0 19.1 228.9 3.3 14.5 2.5 15.4 4.0
Feb. 1,183.1 697.1 468.1 221.6 246.5 19.1 227.4 3.2 14.7 2.7 15.4 3.8
Mar. 1,191.0 697.0 476.0 229.7 246.3 19.3 227.0 3.2 14.7 2.8 15.2 3.1
Apr. 1,197.7 700.0 479.7 232.5 247.1 19.1 228.1 3.2 14.8 2.9 15.3 4.1
May 1,203.1 709.0 475.9 228.2 247.7 19.4 228.3 3.2 15.0 3.0 15.3 4.1
June 1,183.4 697.2 467.8 218.5 249.4 19.5 229.9 3.2 15.1 3.0 15.3 3.7
July 1,207.3 719.5 469.4 220.5 248.9 19.2 229.6 3.2 15.2 3.1 15.3 4.3
Changes *
2022 + 56.2 + 17.7 + 38.8 + 52.1 –13.3 + 1.0 –14.3 – 0.9 + 0.6 – 0.5 + 1.0 + 1.3
2023 + 11.1 – 48.0 + 57.5 + 63.0 – 5.5 + 2.0 – 7.6 – 1.1 + 2.7 + 0.6 + 2.0 + 1.2
2023 Aug. + 0.1 – 6.8 + 6.6 + 9.1 – 2.5 – 0.3 – 2.2 – 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.3
Sep. – 1.3 – 0.7 – 0.5 – 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.5 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2
Oct. + 21.8 + 8.5 + 13.0 + 14.9 – 1.9 + 0.5 – 2.4 – 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.7
Nov. + 4.4 + 11.2 – 7.0 – 7.2 + 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.4 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.9
Dec. – 8.7 – 4.4 – 4.3 – 4.2 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 1.5
2024 Jan. + 9.2 – 8.5 + 17.5 + 19.1 – 1.6 + 0.1 – 1.7 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 1.2
Feb. – 20.7 – 17.5 – 3.3 – 1.8 – 1.5 – 0.0 – 1.5 – 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.2
Mar. + 7.8 – 0.1 + 7.9 + 8.1 – 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.6
Apr. + 6.7 + 3.0 + 3.6 + 2.8 + 0.8 – 0.2 + 1.0 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0
May + 5.5 + 9.2 – 3.9 – 4.4 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0
June – 21.5 – 11.8 – 9.8 – 9.7 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.4
July + 23.9 + 22.3 + 1.5 + 2.0 – 0.5 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.6
4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
36•
IV. Banks
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2
by creditor group by creditor group
Domestic households Domestic households
PeriodDeposits of
domestic
households
and
non-profit
institutions,
total Total TotalSelf-
employed
persons EmployeesOther
individualsDomestic
non-profit
institu-
tions Total TotalSelf-
employed
persons EmployeesOther
individuals
End of year or month *
2021 2,623.6 1,807.1 1,762.4 308.6 1,288.4 165.4 44.7 249.8 237.8 18.2 185.6 33.9
2022 2,688.7 1,854.7 1,809.9 307.3 1,342.5 160.1 44.8 284.8 268.7 31.2 200.5 37.1
2023 2,747.5 1,726.6 1,685.2 270.9 1,271.0 143.4 41.3 455.7 434.0 67.6 317.3 49.2
2024 Feb. 2,753.9 1,693.5 1,652.1 265.9 1,247.2 139.0 41.4 491.7 469.9 74.0 344.0 52.0
Mar. 2,764.9 1,693.3 1,652.0 261.1 1,252.7 138.1 41.3 503.6 481.4 75.5 352.8 53.2
Apr. 2,775.8 1,693.8 1,652.7 265.5 1,251.1 136.1 41.1 514.5 492.2 76.4 361.7 54.1
May 2,785.4 1,695.8 1,653.6 266.0 1,251.8 135.9 42.2 523.6 500.8 77.5 368.6 54.7
June 2,796.9 1,701.7 1,660.3 262.2 1,262.0 136.1 41.4 530.5 507.8 78.3 374.5 55.0
July 2,796.5 1,696.6 1,655.6 267.6 1,253.6 134.4 41.0 537.7 515.0 79.4 380.0 55.5
Changes *
2022 + 66.5 +48.0 +47.8 – 1.5 +54.1 – 4.7 + 0.1 +35.4 +31.4 +12.9 +17.2 +1.2
2023 + 58.9 –132.7 –129.2 –36.7 –76.8 –15.7 – 3.5 +170.6 +164.9 +36.1 +116.5 +12.2
2024 Feb. + 13.8 – 3.8 – 4.2 – 2.0 – 0.7 – 1.4 + 0.4 +16.9 +16.8 + 2.8 +12.7 +1.3
Mar. + 11.0 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 4.8 + 5.5 – 0.8 – 0.1 +11.9 +11.5 + 1.5 + 8.8 +1.2
Apr. + 10.9 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 4.3 – 1.7 – 2.0 – 0.2 +10.9 +10.8 + 0.8 + 8.6 +1.4
May + 9.5 + 2.0 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.7 – 0.2 + 1.0 + 9.0 + 8.5 + 1.1 + 6.8 +0.6
June + 11.5 + 5.9 + 6.7 – 3.8 +10.3 + 0.2 – 0.8 + 7.0 + 7.0 + 0.8 + 5.9 +0.3
July – 0.4 – 5.1 – 4.7 + 5.3 – 8.4 – 1.7 – 0.4 + 7.1 + 7.2 + 1.1 + 5.6 +0.5
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional.Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
marked.  1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group *
€ billion
Deposits
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
PeriodDomestic
government,
total TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans
End of year or month *
2021 210.1 43.5 4.2 3.2 36.0 0.1 11.7 47.4 21.7 13.8 11.3 0.6 14.1
2022 279.8 66.8 7.9 24.2 34.6 0.1 11.4 53.8 17.1 25.2 10.9 0.5 15.9
2023 286.9 52.0 9.8 6.7 35.5 0.0 11.6 51.9 19.7 21.9 9.9 0.4 15.1
2024 Feb. 276.6 49.5 10.1 4.0 35.3 0.0 11.7 57.9 21.1 26.7 9.7 0.4 14.9
Mar. 283.2 49.9 10.6 4.0 35.3 0.0 11.9 63.1 20.8 32.5 9.4 0.4 15.0
Apr. 266.2 49.2 10.4 3.5 35.2 0.0 11.9 54.2 18.1 27.4 8.3 0.4 15.0
May 274.8 49.5 10.5 3.8 35.1 0.0 11.9 54.3 21.3 24.5 8.2 0.4 15.1
June 284.5 49.5 11.5 3.4 34.6 0.0 11.7 66.7 25.3 33.2 7.8 0.4 15.1
July 264.1 49.1 10.6 3.9 34.5 0.0 11.7 58.5 20.8 29.7 7.7 0.4 14.9
Changes *
2022 +69.1 +23.0 +3.5 +20.9 –1.4 –0.0 –0.3 +6.4 –4.6 +11.3 –0.3 –0.1 +1.8
2023 + 6.5 –14.8 +1.9 –17.6 +0.9 –0.0 +0.2 –2.0 +2.9 –3.7 –1.0 –0.1 –0.1
2024 Feb. + 4.1 –1.0 –0.7 –0.2 –0.1 +0.0 +0.1 +2.2 –1.2 +2.8 +0.6 +0.0 +0.0
Mar. + 6.6 +0.5 +0.4 +0.0 –0.0 +0.0 +0.2 +5.2 –0.3 +5.7 –0.2 +0.0 +0.0
Apr. –17.0 –0.8 –0.2 –0.5 –0.1 –0.0 –0.0 –8.9 –2.7 –5.0 –1.2 +0.0 +0.0
May + 8.6 +0.3 +0.1 +0.3 –0.1 +0.0 –0.0 +0.1 +3.1 –2.9 –0.1 –0.0 +0.1
June + 9.6 –0.1 +1.0 –0.4 –0.6 –0.0 –0.2 +12.4 +4.1 +8.7 –0.4 –0.0 +0.0
July –20.4 –0.4 –0.8 +0.5 –0.1 –0.0 –0.0 –8.2 –4.6 –3.5 –0.1 +0.0 –0.2
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, East German Railways and Federal
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and DeutscheTelekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises ”.
Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date
are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
37•
IV. Banks
Savings deposits  3 Memo item:
by maturity
more than 1 year  2
of which:
Domestic
non-profit
institu-
tionsup to and
including
1 year Totalup to and
including
2 yearsmore than
2 years TotalDomestic
householdsDomestic
non-profit
institu-
tionsBank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)  5Liabilities
arising
from repos Period
End of year or month *
12.0 31.7 218.1 10.1 208.0 553.4 547.2 6.2 13.2 6.1 2.8 –2021
16.0 67.2 217.5 10.6 206.9 526.8 521.8 5.1 22.4 6.8 3.1 –2022
21.6 204.7 251.0 38.2 212.7 441.8 438.4 3.4 123.5 21.0 3.5 –2023
21.8 232.4 259.3 45.0 214.3 430.4 427.2 3.2 138.3 28.2 3.7 –2024 Feb.
22.2 242.8 260.8 46.1 214.8 426.3 423.2 3.2 141.7 30.5 3.7 – Mar.
22.3 252.5 262.1 47.1 215.0 421.8 418.7 3.1 145.6 33.8 3.8 – Apr.
22.8 260.9 262.7 47.3 215.4 418.3 415.2 3.1 147.7 36.9 3.8 – May
22.8 267.6 262.9 47.8 215.1 414.2 411.2 3.0 150.4 39.0 3.8 – June
22.7 275.0 262.7 47.7 215.0 410.2 407.3 3.0 152.0 40.3 3.9 – July
Changes *
+ 4.0 + 35.7 – 0.3 +0.5 – 0.8 –26.1 –25.0 –1.1 + 9.2 +0.7 + 0.3 –2022
+ 5.7 +137.0 +33.6 +27.8 + 5.8 –80.1 –78.4 –1.7 +101.1 +2.9 + 0.4 –2023
+ 0.1 + 13.5 + 3.4 +3.3 + 0.1 – 4.9 – 4.9 –0.1 + 5.7 +2.7 + 0.1 –2024 Feb.
+ 0.4 + 10.3 + 1.6 +1.1 + 0.5 – 4.1 – 4.0 –0.1 + 3.4 +2.3 + 0.0 – Mar.
+ 0.1 + 9.7 + 1.2 +1.1 + 0.2 – 4.5 – 4.5 –0.1 + 4.0 +3.3 + 0.1 – Apr.
+ 0.5 + 8.3 + 0.7 +0.2 + 0.4 – 3.5 – 3.5 –0.0 + 2.1 +3.0 + 0.0 – May
+ 0.0 + 6.8 + 0.2 +0.5 – 0.3 – 4.1 – 4.0 –0.1 + 2.7 +2.2 + 0.0 – June
– 0.1 + 7.3 – 0.2 –0.1 – 0.1 – 4.0 – 3.9 –0.1 + 1.6 +1.3 + 0.0 – July
registered debt securities.  2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Table IV.12).  3 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see alsofootnote 2).  4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
5 Included in time deposits.
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2,4Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
70.9 48.5 6.0 12.0 4.4 0.0 48.3 8.0 19.0 20.5 0.8 –2021
80.0 49.2 12.5 13.8 4.4 0.0 79.2 8.3 44.9 25.5 0.6 –2022
83.3 45.6 19.8 14.1 3.8 0.0 99.6 16.1 57.2 25.3 1.0 –2023
77.5 39.4 20.1 14.2 3.7 0.0 91.8 17.1 50.5 23.2 1.0 –2024 Feb.
73.1 35.4 20.0 14.1 3.7 0.0 97.1 22.2 49.6 24.2 1.0 – Mar.
71.6 34.9 19.1 13.9 3.7 0.0 91.2 18.2 49.8 22.1 1.0 – Apr.
77.8 40.6 19.8 13.7 3.7 0.0 93.2 19.7 50.3 22.1 1.1 – May
72.8 36.2 19.3 13.7 3.7 0.0 95.5 22.3 49.0 23.2 1.0 – June
67.9 31.9 18.8 13.6 3.6 0.0 88.6 17.7 46.8 23.2 0.9 – July
Changes *
+10.2 +0.9 + 7.9 +1.3 + 0.1 – +29.6 +0.3 +24.5 +4.9 – 0.2 –2022
+3.2 –3.8 + 7.3 +0.3 – 0.6 – +20.2 +7.8 +12.4 –0.3 + 0.3 –2023
+4.3 +3.9 + 0.3 +0.2 – 0.0 – – 1.4 +0.9 + 0.1 –2.4 + 0.0 –2024 Feb.
–4.4 –4.0 – 0.1 –0.2 – 0.0 – + 5.3 +5.1 – 0.9 +1.1 – 0.0 – Mar.
–1.5 –0.4 – 0.9 –0.1 + 0.0 – – 5.8 –4.0 + 0.2 –2.1 + 0.0 – Apr.
+6.2 +5.7 + 0.7 –0.2 + 0.0 – + 2.0 +1.5 + 0.4 –0.1 + 0.1 – May
–5.0 –4.4 – 0.5 –0.0 – 0.0 – + 2.3 +2.6 – 1.3 +1.1 – 0.1 – June
–5.0 –4.3 – 0.6 –0.0 – 0.0 – – 6.8 –4.6 – 2.2 +0.1 – 0.2 – July
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Federal Railways Fund,
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund,
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund.  2 Including liabilities arising fromnon-negotiable bearer debt securities.  3 Including deposits under savings and loan
contracts.  4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
38•
IV. Banks
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at 3 months'
noticeat more than 3
months' notice
Period Total Total Totalof which:
Special
savings
facilities  2 Totalof which:
Special
savings
facilities  2 Totalof which:
At 3
months'
noticeMemo
item:
Interest
credited
on
savings
depositsnon-banks,
total Totalof which:
With
maturities
of more
than
2 yearsforeign
non-banks
End of year or month *
2021 567.1 561.2 537.1 269.0 24.1 14.8 5.9 5.4 1.5 24.7 24.5 19.5 0.2
2022 538.5 533.2 510.3 254.2 22.9 14.2 5.3 4.8 1.4 34.9 34.6 20.8 0.2
2023 450.5 445.9 395.3 187.1 50.6 43.0 4.6 3.8 2.6 143.2 142.2 35.5 1.0
2024 Mar. 434.9 430.3 373.2 178.5 57.1 50.0 4.5 3.6 0.1 161.8 160.7 38.8 1.1
Apr. 430.2 425.8 367.7 176.3 58.0 51.0 4.5 3.6 0.1 166.0 164.8 39.5 1.1
May 426.7 422.2 363.7 174.7 58.6 51.5 4.5 3.5 0.1 168.4 167.2 40.0 1.1
June 422.5 418.1 359.2 172.6 58.9 51.9 4.4 3.5 0.2 171.1 170.0 40.6 1.2
July 418.4 414.0 355.0 171.0 59.0 52.1 4.4 3.4 0.2 172.6 171.5 41.1 1.2
Changes *
2022 –28.1 –27.5 –26.4 –14.6 –1.2 –0.6 –0.6 –0.6 . +10.2 +10.1 +1.3 +0.1
2023 –83.0 –82.3 –110.0 –52.3 +27.7 +28.8 –0.7 –1.1 . +105.2 +104.5 +12.2 +0.7
2024 Mar. –4.1 –4.1 –5.7 –2.4 +1.7 +1.7 –0.0 –0.1 . +3.4 +3.4 +0.9 –0.0
Apr. –4.6 –4.6 –5.5 –2.1 +0.9 +1.0 –0.0 –0.0 . +4.2 +4.2 +0.7 +0.0
May –3.6 –3.5 –4.0 –1.7 +0.5 +0.5 –0.0 –0.1 . +2.4 +2.4 +0.5 +0.0
June –4.2 –4.2 –4.5 –2.1 +0.3 +0.4 –0.0 –0.0 . +2.8 +2.8 +0.6 +0.0
July –4.1 –4.0 –4.2 –1.6 +0.1 +0.2 –0.0 –0.1 . +1.5 +1.5 +0.5 +0.0
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified as timedeposits.  2 Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or
basic rate of interest.  3 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
securities.
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper
of which:
with maturities ofNon-negotiable
bearer debt
securities and
money market
paper  6 Subordinated
up to
and including 1 yearmore than 1 year up to
and including 2 years
Period TotalFloating
rate
bonds  1Zero
coupon
bonds  1,2Foreign
currency
bonds  3,4Certifi-
cates
of
deposit Totalof which:
without
a nominal
guarantee  5Totalof which:
without
a nominal
guarantee  5more
than
2 years Totalof which:
with
maturities
of more
than
2 yearsnegotiable
debt
securitiesnon-
negotiable
debt
securities
End of year or month *
2021 1,173.6 106.8 13.5 331.4 98.7 106.8 1.9 18.0 4.5 1,048.8 0.9 0.7 34.6 0.1
2022 1,231.5 92.8 15.0 307.8 88.6 98.6 1.4 26.6 3.4 1,106.4 0.8 0.7 37.8 0.1
2023 1,327.5 85.8 15.7 312.6 101.2 122.9 1.3 43.7 3.4 1,160.9 0.0 0.0 37.5 0.1
2024 Mar. 1,362.4 93.1 17.3 310.4 93.6 114.0 1.4 49.0 3.7 1,199.4 0.0 0.0 37.9 0.1
Apr. 1,355.4 95.1 16.7 304.7 75.2 93.0 1.4 53.0 3.8 1,209.4 0.0 0.0 38.1 0.1
May 1,357.0 96.8 16.3 303.2 73.6 91.1 1.5 53.1 3.9 1,212.8 0.0 0.0 38.6 0.1
June 1,369.3 95.9 15.9 320.9 90.4 107.3 1.5 53.2 3.7 1,208.9 0.1 0.0 38.7 0.1
July 1,351.5 97.4 16.1 303.6 79.9 96.3 1.5 53.4 3.8 1,201.9 0.1 0.0 38.7 0.1
Changes *
2022 +59.1 –12.7 +1.1 –23.6 –9.9 –8.3 – 0.5 +8.5 –1.1 +58.9 –0.1 +0.1 +3.5 –
2023 +97.0 –6.3 +1.4 +4.4 +11.4 +24.5 – 0.0 +17.7 +0.6 +54.8 +0.0 +0.1 –0.3 –
2024 Mar. +13.7 +2.9 +0.2 +3.7 +10.0 +9.3 – 0.1 +0.4 –0.0 +4.1 –0.0 –0.0 +0.2 –
Apr. – 7.0 +2.0 –0.6 –5.7 –18.5 –21.0 + 0.0 +3.9 +0.1 +10.0 +0.0 +0.0 +0.3 –
May + 1.6 +1.7 –0.3 –1.5 –1.6 –2.4 + 0.0 +0.6 +0.1 +3.4 –0.0 –0.0 +0.4 –0.0
June +12.3 –0.9 –0.5 +17.7 +16.8 +16.1 – 0.0 +0.1 –0.2 –3.9 +0.1 – +0.1 –
July –17.8 +1.6 +0.2 –17.3 –10.5 –11.0 + 0.1 +0.2 +0.1 –7.0 –0.0 –0.0 –0.0 –
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Including debt securities denominated in foreign currencies.  2 Issue value when
floated.  3 Including floating rate notes and zero coupon bonds denominated in foreigncurrencies.  4 Bonds denominated in non-euro area currencies.  5 Negotiable bearer debt
securities and money market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%.
6 Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see
also Table IV.10, footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
39•
IV. Banks
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany *
Interim statements
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks
(MFIs)  6Deposits of non-
banks (non-MFIs)
Building loans
End of
year/monthNum-
ber
of
associ-
ationsBalance
sheet
total  1Credit
bal-
ances
and
loans
(ex-
cluding
building
loans)  2Building
loans  3Bank
debt
secur-
ities  4Loans
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsInterim
and
bridging
loansOther
building
loansSecur-
ities (in-
cluding
Treasury
bills
and
Treasury
discount
paper)  5Deposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsSight
and time
depositsDeposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsSight and
time de-
posits  7Bearer
debt
secur-
ities
out-
stand-
ingCapital
(includ-
ing pub-
lished
re-
serves)  8Memo
item:
New
con-
tracts
entered
into in
year or
month  9
All building and loan associations
2023 15 259.5 25.6 0.1 15.9 15.7 135.0 41.3 21.8 1.2 36.8 183.2 10.7 6.6 13.0 98.2
2024 May 14 258.6 24.4 0.2 15.7 17.9 134.1 41.6 20.7 0.9 36.6 180.7 11.8 7.5 13.1 6.2
June 14 258.6 23.8 0.2 15.7 18.3 134.1 41.8 20.5 0.9 36.7 180.4 11.9 7.6 13.2 6.3
July 14 259.6 24.0 0.2 15.7 18.9 133.9 41.7 20.8 0.9 37.9 179.8 12.2 7.6 13.2 6.4
Private building and Ioan associations
2024 May 9 182.5 10.7 0.2 8.9 11.9 103.9 35.5 8.8 0.3 33.4 115.8 11.3 7.5 9.0 4.0
June 9 183.1 10.5 0.2 9.0 12.2 103.8 35.6 8.9 0.3 34.0 115.6 11.4 7.6 9.0 4.0
July 9 184.1 10.9 0.2 9.0 12.5 103.6 35.7 9.2 0.3 34.9 115.2 11.9 7.6 9.0 4.0
Public building and Ioan associations
2024 May 5 76.1 13.8 0.0 6.8 6.0 30.2 6.2 11.9 0.7 3.1 64.9 0.5 – 4.1 2.3
June 5 75.5 13.3 0.0 6.7 6.1 30.2 6.2 11.6 0.6 2.7 64.7 0.5 – 4.2 2.3
July 5 75.5 13.1 0.0 6.7 6.3 30.3 6.1 11.6 0.6 3.0 64.6 0.3 – 4.2 2.4
Trends in building and loan association business
€ billion
Capital promised Capital disbursed Changes in deposits
under savings and
loan contracts AllocationsDisbursement
commitments
outstanding at
end of periodInterest and
repayments
received on
building loans  11
Deposits under
savings and
loan contractsLoans under
savings and
loan contracts  10
PeriodAmounts
paid into
savings
and
loan ac-
counts  10Interest
credited
on
deposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsRepay-
ments
of
deposits
under
cancelled
savings
and
loan
con-
tracts Totalof
which:
Net
alloca-
tions  12 Total Totalof which:
Applied
to settle-
ment of
interim
and
bridging
loans Totalof which:
Applied
to settle-
ment of
interim
and
bridging
loansNewly
granted
interim
and
bridging
loans
and
other
building
loans Totalof
which:
Under
alloc-
ated
con-
tracts Totalof
which:
Repay-
ments
during
quarterMemo
item:
Housing
bonuses
re-
ceived  13
All building and loan associations
2023 27.0 1.9 6.4 52.0 40.3 49.9 25.9 4.2 8.7 4.4 15.3 12.6 7.3 4.9 4.1 0.2
2024 May 2.4 0.1 0.5 4.5 3.5 4.1 2.2 0.4 0.8 0.4 1.1 12.2 7.4 0.5 0.0
June 2.1 0.1 0.5 4.4 3.3 4.0 2.1 0.3 0.8 0.3 1.1 12.2 7.5 0.5 1.1 0.0
July 2.1 0.0 0.6 4.6 3.5 4.5 2.2 0.4 1.0 0.4 1.3 11.9 7.4 0.5 . 0.0
Private building and Ioan associations
2024 May 1.5 0.0 0.2 3.1 2.3 2.9 1.5 0.3 0.5 0.3 0.9 7.9 4.1 0.3 0.0
June 1.3 0.0 0.2 3.0 2.2 2.7 1.4 0.3 0.5 0.3 0.9 7.9 4.1 0.3 0.7 0.0
July 1.4 0.0 0.3 3.2 2.3 3.1 1.5 0.3 0.7 0.4 1.0 7.7 4.1 0.4 . 0.0
Public building and Ioan associations
2024 May 0.9 0.0 0.2 1.5 1.2 1.2 0.7 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.3 3.4 0.1 0.0
June 0.8 0.0 0.2 1.5 1.1 1.3 0.7 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.3 3.4 0.1 0.3 0.0
July 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.5 1.2 1.4 0.7 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.3 3.3 0.1 . 0.0
* Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures for
the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which
appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 See Table IV.2,
footnote 1.  2 Including claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from
registered debt securities and central bank credit balances.  3 Loans under savings and
loan contracts and interim and bridging loans.  4 Including money market paper and
small amounts of other securities issued by banks.  5 Including equalisation claims.
6 Including liabilities to building and loan associations.  7 Including small amounts of
savings deposits.  8 Including participation rights capital and fund for general bankingrisks. 9 Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as
new contracts.  10 For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
arising from the allocation of contracts see "Capital disbursed".  11 Including housing
bonuses credited.  12 Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans.  13 The amounts already
credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in "Amounts paid into
savings and loan accounts" and "Interest and repayments received on building loans".

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
40•
IV. Banks
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other assets  7
Credit balances and loans Loans
PeriodGerman
banks
(MFIs)
with
foreign
branches
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diaries 
 
foreign
branches  1
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diariesBalance
sheet
total  7 Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2,3 Total Totalto
German
non-
banksto
foreign
non-
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2 Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio
Foreign branches                                               End of year or month *
2021 51 207 1,504.5 471.2 457.8 297.9 159.9 13.4 497.2 418.8 12.9 405.9 78.4 536.1 404.5
2022 47 202 1,625.5 461.8 447.4 315.6 131.8 14.4 516.7 447.7 9.7 437.9 69.0 647.0 513.3
2023 47 200 1,544.2 457.5 437.7 304.4 133.3 19.8 507.9 421.0 5.4 415.6 86.9 578.8 417.0
2023 Sep. 48 201 1,680.8 488.5 468.9 315.9 153.1 19.6 496.6 420.9 6.4 414.5 75.7 695.7 513.6
Oct. 48 201 1,693.0 477.0 457.2 306.9 150.3 19.8 499.7 420.5 6.0 414.5 79.2 716.3 529.9
Nov. 47 200 1,622.2 468.5 448.3 304.7 143.6 20.2 507.9 422.9 5.7 417.2 85.0 645.8 462.2
Dec. 47 200 1,544.2 457.5 437.7 304.4 133.3 19.8 507.9 421.0 5.4 415.6 86.9 578.8 417.0
2024 Jan. 47 200 1,580.2 471.1 450.1 310.0 140.1 21.0 518.6 425.0 5.1 419.9 93.6 590.5 402.9
Feb. 47 200 1,620.1 486.0 464.7 322.5 142.2 21.3 517.5 424.8 5.0 419.9 92.7 616.7 425.7
Mar. 47 199 1,634.7 506.6 483.8 327.2 156.6 22.8 523.9 431.4 5.1 426.3 92.6 604.1 428.8
Apr. 47 199 1,668.0 499.4 474.9 325.7 149.3 24.4 520.3 432.4 4.8 427.5 88.0 648.2 477.1
May 47 199 1,647.4 504.5 482.0 330.9 151.1 22.4 528.0 440.3 4.9 435.5 87.7 614.9 439.2
June 47 198 1,612.4 498.6 478.8 329.8 148.9 19.9 538.5 449.1 4.9 444.2 89.3 575.3 421.0
Changes *
2022 –4 –5 +124.1 –13.3 –14.3 +17.8 –32.1 +1.0 +6.7 +17.5 –3.2 +20.6 –10.8 +108.1 +103.0
2023 ±0 –2 –83.7 –2.7 –8.1 –12.1 +4.0 +5.4 –1.4 –20.2 –4.4 –15.8 +18.8 – 68.1 –94.4
2023 Oct. ±0 – +12.3 –11.0 –11.2 –8.9 –2.3 +0.2 +4.4 +0.7 –0.4 +1.2 +3.6 + 20.8 +16.6
Nov. –1 –1 –69.3 –6.3 –6.8 –2.2 –4.5 +0.5 +14.6 +8.2 –0.3 +8.5 +6.4 – 69.0 –66.3
Dec. ±0 – –77.5 –10.0 –9.6 +0.3 –9.9 –0.4 +2.6 +0.5 –0.3 +0.8 +2.1 – 67.5 –44.7
2024 Jan. ±0 – +35.3 +12.4 +11.3 +5.6 +5.6 +1.1 +5.7 –0.4 –0.3 –0.1 +6.1 + 11.1 –15.1
Feb. ±0 – +39.9 +15.1 +14.8 +12.5 +2.3 +0.3 –1.0 –0.0 –0.1 +0.1 –0.9 + 26.2 +22.8
Mar. ±0 –1 +14.4 +20.6 +19.1 +4.7 +14.4 +1.5 +6.2 +6.3 +0.2 +6.2 –0.1 – 12.6 + 3.0
Apr. ±0 – +32.9 –7.5 –9.2 –1.5 –7.7 +1.6 –5.4 –0.6 –0.3 –0.3 –4.8 + 43.7 +48.1
May ±0 – –19.9 +6.2 +8.2 +5.2 +3.0 –2.0 +10.8 +10.8 +0.0 +10.7 +0.0 – 32.6 –37.5
June ±0 –1 –35.7 –7.1 –4.5 –1.1 –3.4 –2.6 +6.6 +5.4 +0.1 +5.3 +1.2 – 40.3 –18.8
Foreign subsidiaries 8                                           End of year or month *
2021 12 35 246.0 50.8 44.4 20.7 23.7 6.3 139.5 116.3 12.6 103.7 23.2 55.7 0.0
2022 11 32 256.7 61.5 52.0 20.5 31.4 9.5 145.8 124.5 13.3 111.2 21.3 49.4 0.0
2023 12 31 264.0 74.5 63.9 25.7 38.2 10.6 146.4 125.2 11.9 113.4 21.1 43.1 0.0
2023 Mar. 11 32 253.9 62.2 51.7 20.7 31.0 10.5 146.5 126.2 13.3 112.9 20.2 45.2 0.0
Apr. 11 31 250.9 64.4 53.3 22.4 30.9 11.1 145.3 125.6 13.0 112.6 19.8 41.2 0.0
May 11 31 250.9 59.3 48.8 21.5 27.2 10.5 146.2 126.3 12.8 113.5 19.9 45.5 0.0
June 12 32 253.3 64.2 52.8 22.4 30.4 11.5 146.6 126.7 12.7 113.9 19.9 42.5 0.0
July 12 31 253.4 63.6 52.2 23.0 29.3 11.4 147.4 126.9 12.9 114.1 20.5 42.4 0.0
Aug. 12 31 252.8 62.8 52.2 21.9 30.3 10.6 146.0 125.6 12.7 112.9 20.4 44.1 0.0
Sep. 12 31 256.2 66.4 56.0 25.0 31.0 10.5 146.7 125.8 12.3 113.5 20.9 43.0 0.0
Oct. 12 31 257.4 65.8 56.0 24.5 31.5 9.8 146.8 126.2 12.0 114.2 20.6 44.8 0.0
Nov. 12 31 259.9 66.9 57.7 23.6 34.1 9.3 147.8 126.9 12.1 114.8 20.9 45.2 0.0
Dec. 12 31 264.0 74.5 63.9 25.7 38.2 10.6 146.4 125.2 11.9 113.4 21.1 43.1 0.0
Changes *
2022 –1 –3 +6.5 +8.2 +5.2 –0.2 +5.6 +2.8 +5.0 +6.9 +0.7 +6.3 –1.9 – 6.5 ± 0.0
2023 +1 –1 +8.7 +13.5 +12.2 +5.2 +7.1 +1.2 +1.5 +1.7 –1.4 +3.1 –0.2 – 6.3 ± 0.0
2023 Apr. – –1 –2.7 +2.2 +1.6 +1.7 –0.1 +0.6 –0.8 –0.4 –0.3 –0.1 –0.5 – 4.1 ± 0.0
May – – –1.5 –5.7 –4.9 –0.8 –4.1 –0.7 –0.1 –0.3 –0.2 –0.0 +0.1 + 4.3 ± 0.0
June +1 +1 +3.2 +5.3 +4.2 +0.9 +3.3 +1.0 +0.9 +0.9 –0.0 +0.9 +0.0 – 3.0 ± 0.0
July – –1 +0.6 –0.5 –0.4 +0.6 –1.0 –0.1 +1.2 +0.7 +0.1 +0.5 +0.6 – 0.1 ± 0.0
Aug. – – –1.2 –1.0 –0.2 –1.0 +0.8 –0.9 –1.8 –1.7 –0.2 –1.5 –0.1 + 1.7 ± 0.0
Sep. – – +2.2 +3.2 +3.5 +3.0 +0.5 –0.2 –0.0 –0.5 –0.4 –0.1 +0.5 – 1.0 ± 0.0
Oct. – – +1.4 –0.6 +0.1 –0.4 +0.5 –0.7 +0.2 +0.5 –0.3 +0.8 –0.3 + 1.8 ± 0.0
Nov. – – +3.8 +1.5 +2.0 –0.9 +2.9 –0.4 +1.8 +1.5 +0.1 +1.5 +0.3 + 0.4 ± 0.0
Dec. – – +4.5 +7.7 +6.3 +2.1 +4.2 +1.4 –1.1 –1.3 –0.2 –1.1 +0.3 – 2.0 ± 0.0
* In this table "foreign" also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from
the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are alwaysto be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following
Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Several branches in a given country of
domicile are regarded as a single branch.  2 Treasury bills, Treasury discount paper

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
41•
IV. Banks
Deposits Other liabilities  6,7
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4
Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banks Total Total 
Shortterm 
Medium
and
longtermForeign
non-banksMoney
market
paper
and debt
securities
outstand-
ing 5Working
capital
and own
funds Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio Period
End of year or month *                  Foreign branches
950.2 638.5 461.2 177.3 311.7 8.1 6.3 1.8 303.6 65.2 51.3 437.9 403.4 2021
943.4 573.6 435.2 138.5 369.8 10.4 8.9 1.5 359.4 61.7 63.1 557.4 512.9 2022
943.5 554.5 422.6 131.9 389.0 10.6 9.5 1.2 378.4 64.1 66.1 470.5 418.3 2023
963.9 571.6 418.7 152.9 392.3 11.0 9.6 1.4 381.3 84.4 66.0 566.5 513.9 2023 Sep.
958.1 572.8 421.2 151.6 385.3 11.0 9.5 1.4 374.3 82.9 66.0 586.0 530.5 Oct.
958.5 561.4 414.6 146.8 397.0 11.5 10.3 1.2 385.5 81.2 65.9 516.6 463.3 Nov.
943.5 554.5 422.6 131.9 389.0 10.6 9.5 1.2 378.4 64.1 66.1 470.5 418.3 Dec.
967.4 573.0 433.0 140.0 394.4 11.0 9.8 1.2 383.4 88.2 69.1 455.4 404.8 2024 Jan.
984.5 586.5 443.4 143.1 398.0 10.7 9.7 1.0 387.3 88.5 69.2 477.9 427.6 Feb.
997.2 587.3 442.4 144.9 409.9 11.3 10.3 1.0 398.6 86.3 69.4 481.8 431.6 Mar.
978.9 576.4 435.8 140.6 402.5 11.1 10.1 1.0 391.4 88.0 69.2 531.8 479.3 Apr.
998.2 591.9 449.7 142.1 406.3 14.8 13.9 1.0 391.5 85.8 69.0 494.4 443.4 May
986.4 578.3 450.5 127.8 408.0 14.2 13.2 1.0 393.8 81.7 69.5 474.7 423.1 June
Changes *
– 6.2 –64.2 –22.2 –42.0 + 58.0 + 2.3 + 2.6 – 0.3 +55.7 – 6.3 +11.8 +119.0 + 109.5 2022
+ 1.2 –17.0 –13.8 – 3.1 + 18.1 + 1.2 + 1.5 – 0.3 +16.9 + 3.9 + 3.0 – 88.0 – 94.5 2023
– 5.2 +1.7 +2.5 –0.8 – 6.9 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 6.9 – 1.3 +0.0 + 19.4 + 16.6 2023 Oct.
+ 3.1 –8.9 –6.6 –2.3 +12.0 + 0.5 + 0.8 – 0.3 +11.5 – 0.2 –0.2 – 69.3 – 67.1 Nov.
–13.7 –5.9 +8.4 –14.3 – 7.9 – 0.9 – 0.9 + 0.0 – 7.0 –16.6 +0.2 – 46.7 – 45.0 Dec.
+22.3 +17.2 +10.4 +6.8 + 5.2 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 4.8 +23.5 +3.0 – 15.1 – 13.5 2024 Jan.
+17.2 +13.7 +10.5 +3.2 + 3.5 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 + 3.8 + 0.3 +0.1 + 22.5 + 22.8 Feb.
+12.7 +0.7 –1.0 +1.8 +11.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 – 0.1 +11.4 – 2.3 +0.1 + 4.0 + 4.0 Mar.
–18.8 –11.4 –6.6 –4.8 – 7.4 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 7.3 + 1.3 –0.2 + 50.0 + 47.7 Apr.
+20.5 +16.6 +13.9 +2.7 + 3.9 + 3.7 + 3.7 – 0.0 + 0.1 – 1.5 –0.2 – 37.4 – 35.9 May
–13.2 –14.7 +0.7 –15.5 + 1.5 – 0.6 – 0.6 + 0.0 + 2.2 – 4.8 +0.5 – 19.7 – 20.3 June
End of year or month * Foreign subsidiaries 8
178.6 64.2 33.0 31.2 114.4 7.3 4.9 2.4 107.1 16.4 20.3 30.7 0.0 2021
189.4 67.5 38.6 28.9 122.0 6.9 4.6 2.3 115.1 13.5 20.1 33.7 0.0 2022
195.9 76.0 51.2 24.8 119.9 6.4 4.0 2.4 113.4 12.1 20.8 35.3 0.0 2023
186.6 71.2 42.2 29.1 115.4 6.8 4.3 2.5 108.5 12.3 20.3 34.8 0.0 2023 Mar.
183.5 71.0 44.0 27.0 112.5 6.9 4.5 2.5 105.6 12.2 20.2 35.0 0.0 Apr.
183.9 71.2 43.6 27.6 112.8 6.9 4.4 2.5 105.9 12.1 20.6 34.3 0.0 May
185.6 71.9 45.4 26.5 113.7 6.6 4.2 2.4 107.1 10.6 20.5 36.6 0.0 June
187.9 72.3 47.0 25.3 115.6 6.8 4.4 2.4 108.8 10.5 20.5 34.4 0.0 July
185.5 70.6 46.0 24.7 114.8 6.6 4.2 2.4 108.2 10.3 20.6 36.4 0.0 Aug.
188.2 74.1 49.1 25.1 114.1 6.7 4.3 2.4 107.4 11.3 20.5 36.0 0.0 Sep.
189.3 73.1 48.3 24.8 116.2 6.5 4.1 2.4 109.7 11.6 20.8 35.8 0.0 Oct.
192.1 73.7 48.4 25.3 118.4 6.5 4.1 2.4 111.8 11.6 20.8 35.4 0.0 Nov.
195.9 76.0 51.2 24.8 119.9 6.4 4.0 2.4 113.4 12.1 20.8 35.3 0.0 Dec.
Changes *
+ 7.7 + 1.4 + 5.6 – 4.2 + 6.3 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.1 + 6.7 – 2.9 – 0.2 + 2.2 ± 0.0 2022
+ 7.6 + 8.9 +12.6 – 3.8 – 1.3 – 0.4 – 0.5 + 0.1 – 0.8 – 1.4 + 0.7 + 1.8 ± 0.0 2023
– 2.7 –0.1 +1.8 –1.9 – 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 2.7 – 0.1 –0.1 + 0.2 ± 0.0 2023 Apr.
– 0.6 –0.3 –0.4 +0.2 – 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.4 – 0.0 +0.4 – 1.2 ± 0.0 May
+ 2.3 +1.0 +1.8 –0.9 + 1.3 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 1.6 – 1.6 –0.1 + 2.5 ± 0.0 June
+ 2.7 +0.6 +1.6 –1.1 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 2.0 – 0.0 +0.0 – 2.1 ± 0.0 July
– 2.9 –1.9 –1.0 –0.8 – 1.1 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.9 – 0.2 +0.1 + 1.8 ± 0.0 Aug.
+ 1.9 +3.2 +3.1 +0.1 – 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 1.4 + 1.0 –0.1 – 0.7 ± 0.0 Sep.
+ 1.2 –1.0 –0.8 –0.2 + 2.2 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 2.3 + 0.2 +0.3 – 0.2 ± 0.0 Oct.
+ 3.7 +0.9 +0.1 +0.8 + 2.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 2.8 + 0.1 +0.0 – 0.0 ± 0.0 Nov.
+ 4.1 +2.4 +2.8 –0.4 + 1.7 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 1.8 + 0.4 +0.0 + 0.0 ± 0.0 Dec.
and other money market paper, debt securities.  3 Including own debt securities.
4 Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities.  5 Issues of
negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money market paper.  6 Includingsubordinated liabilities.  7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1.  8 The collection of data
regarding foreign subsidiaries matured in 12/2023.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
42•
V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2Required reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4 Current accounts  5Excess reserves
(without deposit
facility)  6 Deficiencies  7
2017 12,415.8 124.2 123.8 1,275.2 1,151.4 0.0
2018 12,775.2 127.8 127.4 1,332.1 1,204.8 0.0
2019 13,485.4 134.9 134.5 1,623.7 1,489.3 0.0
2020 14,590.4 145.9 145.5 3,029.4 2,883.9 0.0
2021 15,576.6 155.8 155.4 3,812.3 3,656.9 0.1
2022 16,843.0 168.4 168.0 195.6 28.1 0.0
2023 16,261.6 162.6 162.3 170.5 8.2 0.0
2024 June 16,226.6 162.3 161.9 168.1 6.2 0.0
p July 16,253.3 162.5 162.2 ... ... ...
Aug. . . . . . .
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2German share of
euro area reserve base
as a percentageRequired reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4Current accounts  5Excess reserves
(without deposit
facility)  6 Deficiencies  7
2017 3,456,192 27.8 34,562 34,404 424,547 390,143 2
2018 3,563,306 27.9 35,633 35,479 453,686 418,206 1
2019 3,728,027 27.6 37,280 37,131 486,477 449,346 0
2020 4,020,792 27.6 40,208 40,062 878,013 837,951 1
2021 4,260,398 27.4 42,604 42,464 1,048,819 1,006,355 0
2022 4,664,630 27.7 46,646 46,512 54,848 8,337 5
2023 4,483,853 27.6 44,839 44,709 47,008 2,299 0
2024 June 4,465,934 27.5 44,659 44,530 46,088 1,558 0
p July 4,495,004 27.7 44,950 44,821 ... ... ...
Aug. . . . . . . .
a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Big banksRegional banks
and other
commercial banksBranches of
foreign banksLandesbanken and
savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banksBanks with special,
development and
other central
support tasks
2017 6,366 5,678 3,110 11,163 6,256 132 1,699
2018 7,384 4,910 3,094 11,715 6,624 95 1,658
2019 7,684 5,494 2,765 12,273 7,028 109 1,778
2020 8,151 6,371 3,019 12,912 7,547 111 2,028
2021 9,113 6,713 2,943 13,682 8,028 109 1,876
2022 9,814 7,396 3,216 14,465 8,295 117 2,471
2023 9,282 7,417 3,170 14,061 8,178 148 2,118
2024 June 9,301 7,441 3,018 14,154 8,266 140 2,031
July 9,356 7,660 2,870 14,292 8,316 138 2,022
Aug. . . . . . . .
b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Liabilities (excluding savings
deposits, deposits with build-
ing and loan associations
and repos) to non-MFIs with
agreed maturities of up to 2
yearsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed maturities
of up to 2 years to MFIs that are
resident in euro area countries but
not subject to minimum reserve
requirementsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed
maturities of up to 2 years to
banks in non-euro area countriesSavings deposits with agreed
periods of notice of up
to 2 yearsLiabilities arising from bearer debt
securities issued with agreed matu-
rities of up to 2 years and bearer
money market paper after deduction
of a standard amount for bearer debt
certificates or deduction of such
paper held by the reporting
institution
2017 2,338,161 628 415,084 581,416 120,894
2018 2,458,423 1,162 414,463 576,627 112,621
2019 2,627,478 1,272 410,338 577,760 111,183
2020 2,923,462 1,607 436,696 560,770 105,880
2021 3,079,722 9,030 508,139 561,608 101,907
2022 3,352,177 12,609 566,227 543,694 116,094
2023 3,447,513 968 420,839 455,493 125,531
2024 June 3,503,135 1,963 393,765 425,000 124,033
July 3,532,041 1,276 401,017 421,384 122,530
Aug. . . . . .
1 The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main refinancing
operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for
which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled.  2 Article 5 of the
Regulation (EU) 2021/378 of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum
reserve requirements (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies,
pursuant to Article 6(1)(a)).  3 Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was 2%between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it has stood at
1%. 4 Article 6(2) of the Regulation (EU) 2021/378 of the European Central Bank on the
application of minimum reserve requirements.  5 Average credit balances of credit
institutions at national central banks.  6 Average credit balances less required reserves
after deduction of the lump-sum allowance.  7 Required reserves after deduction of the
lump-sum allowance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
43•
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest
% per annum
ECB interest rates Basic rates of interest
Main refinancing
operationsMain refinancing
operations
Applicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1Applicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1
2015 Dec. 9 – 0.30 0.05 – 0.30 2023 Feb. 8 2.50 3.00 – 3.25 2009 Jan. 1 1.62 2015 Jan. 1 – 0.83
Mar. 22 3.00 3.50 – 3.75 July 1 0.12
2016 Mar. 16 – 0.40 0.00 – 0.25 May 10 3.25 3.75 – 4.00 2016 July 1 – 0.88
June 21 3.50 4.00 – 4.25 2011 July 1 0.37
2019 Sep. 18 – 0.50 0.00 – 0.25 Aug. 2 3.75 4.25 – 4.50 2023 Jan. 1 1.62
Sep. 20 4.00 4.50 – 4.75 2012 Jan. 1 0.12 July 1 3.12
2022 July 27 0.00 0.50 – 0.75
Sep. 14 0.75 1.25 – 1.50 2024 June 12 3.75 4.25 – 4.50 2013 Jan. 1 – 0.13 2024 Jan. 1 3.62
Nov. 2 1.50 2.00 – 2.25 Sep. 18 2 3.50 3.65 – 3.90 July 1 – 0.38 July 1 3.37
Dec. 21 2.00 2.50 – 2.75
1 Pursuant to Section 247 of the Civil Code.  2 Effective 18 September 2024, the spread
between the rate on the main refinancing operations and the deposit facility rate will
be reduced to 15 basis points. The spread between the rate on the marginal lendingfacility and the rate on the main refinancing operations will remain unchanged at 25
basis points.
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid
amountAllotment
amount Fixed rateMinimum
bid rate Marginal rate  1Weighted
average rate
Date of
Settlement € million % per annumRunning for
… days
Main refinancing operations
2024 Aug. 7 1 762 1 762 4.25 – – – 7
Aug. 14 1 866  1 866 4.25 – – – 7
Aug. 21 2 868 2 868 4.25 – – – 7
Aug. 28 4 016 4 016 4.25 – – – 7
Sep. 11 2 053 2 053 4.25 – – – 7
Long-term refinancing operations
2024 May 29 1 170 1 170 2   4.29 – – − 91
Jun. 26 5 877 5 877 2      … – – − 91
Jul. 31 1 881 1 881 2      … – – − 91
Aug. 28 2 030 2 030 2      … – – − 91
* Source: ECB.  1 Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or
collected.  2 Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at: a) the
average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of thisoperation including a spread or b) the average deposit facility rate over the life of this
operation.
3. Money market rates, by month
% per annum
EURIBOR ®  2
Monthly
average €STR  1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Twelve-month funds
2024 Jan. 3.904 3.874 3.869 3.925 3.892 3.609
Feb. 3.907 3.878 3.868 3.923 3.901 3.671
Mar. 3.907 3.873 3.853 3.923 3.895 3.718
Apr. 3.908 3.868 3.853 3.885 3.838 3.703
May 3.907 3.881 3.816 3.813 3.787 3.680
June 3.749 3.681 3.635 3.725 3.715 3.650
July 3.663 3.611 3.618 3.685 3.644 3.526
Aug. 3.663 3.626 3.597 3.548 3.425 3.166
* Publication does not establish an entitlement to provision of the rates. The Deutsche
Bundesbank reserves the right to cease publishing the information on its website in
future. All data are supplied without liability. No explicit or implicit assurances or
guarantees are made as to the up-to-dateness, accuracy, timeliness, completeness,
marketability or suitability of the data as interest rates or reference interest rates.
Neither the European Money Markets Institute (EMMI), nor Euribor EBF, nor Euribor
ACI, nor the Euribor Panel Banks, nor the Euribor Steering Committee, nor the
European Central Bank, nor Reuters, nor the Deutsche Bundesbank can be held liable
for any irregularity or inaccuracy, incompleteness or late provision of the money market
rates. With regard to the €STR please consider the European Central Bank's disclaimer,
which also applies for the Deutsche Bundesbank's publication:
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/financial_markets_and_interest_rates/euro_short-
term_rate/html/index.en.html
1 Euro Short-Term Rate: On the basis of individual euro-denominated transactions
conducted and settled on the previous business day, the European Central Bankpublishes the €STR since 2 October 2019. Transactions are reported by euro area banks
subject to reporting obligations in compliance with Money Market Statistical Reporting
Regulation. Monthly averages are calculations by Deutsche Bundesbank.  2 Monthly
averages are own calculations by Deutsche Bundesbank based on Euribor® daily rates
calculated by the European Money Markets Institute (EMMI). These are unweighted
averages. Information on the methodology of Euribor® daily rates are available below.
Please be aware that commercial use of these data is only possible with a licence
agreement with the European Money Markets Institute (EMMI). Information on its
terms of use are available under the link below. Values calculated from November 2023
onwards with three decimal places. Previous values calculated with two decimal places.
For technical reasons, these values are also displayed with three decimal places and the
third decimal place is filled with a 0. Up to and including October 2023 all values
calculated and published with two decimal places
https://www.emmi-benchmarks.eu/terms-of-use
https://www.emmi-benchmarks.eu/benchmarks/euribor/

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
44•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
a) Outstanding amounts o
Households' deposits Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2023 July 2.37 222,529 0.92 227,182 3.01 168,874 1.24 21,619
Aug. 2.52 246,001 0.94 228,521 3.15 180,132 1.27 21,610
Sep. 2.61 262,537 0.95 229,285 3.27 181,385 1.28 21,507
Oct. 2.76 288,227 0.97 230,966 3.39 197,527 1.32 21,449
Nov. 2.88 315,984 1.01 233,972 3.43 193,442 1.39 21,232
Dec. 2.96 338,959 1.04 237,917 3.47 190,801 1.43 21,697
2024 Jan. 3.01 364,579 1.06 240,513 3.51 204,092 1.46 21,689
Feb. 3.04 385,969 1.08 241,610 3.54 205,657 1.48 20,732
Mar. 3.06 400,182 1.09 242,659 3.56 212,882 1.56 20,688
Apr. 3.08 414,278 1.11 243,548 3.54 213,659 1.62 20,719
May 3.09 424,087 1.12 244,423 3.50 211,340 1.75 20,827
June 3.09 433,321 1.13 244,777 3.42 200,180 1.84 21,079
July 3.10 441,342 1.14 245,319 3.44 204,085 1.91 21,085
Housing loans to households  3 Loans to households for consumption and other purposes  4,5
with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2023 July 5.34 3,413 3.26 25,712 1.83 1,548,159 9.45 47,192 4.35 76,468 3.90 330,500
Aug. 5.41 3,391 3.33 25,573 1.85 1,550,499 9.55 47,277 4.45 76,654 3.95 330,602
Sep. 5.49 3,233 3.38 25,315 1.86 1,553,618 9.72 47,706 4.54 76,662 3.99 329,641
Oct. 5.57 3,312 3.50 25,212 1.87 1,554,344 9.95 47,325 4.65 76,583 4.06 329,490
Nov. 5.70 3,294 3.58 24,792 1.89 1,556,410 9.99 46,653 4.74 76,885 4.09 328,941
Dec. 5.62 3,198 3.64 24,499 1.90 1,556,523 10.01 47,390 4.81 77,044 4.13 326,980
2024 Jan. 5.66 3,354 3.69 24,060 1.91 1,554,763 10.16 46,574 4.89 76,552 4.18 327,358
Feb. 5.70 3,250 3.72 23,819 1.92 1,555,595 10.18 46,259 4.97 76,486 4.22 327,721
Mar. 5.68 3,184 3.75 23,540 1.93 1,558,297 10.05 47,109 4.90 76,985 4.26 326,829
Apr. 5.65 3,289 3.78 23,271 1.94 1,559,197 10.13 45,949 4.97 76,906 4.30 327,227
May 5.55 3,400 3.81 23,042 1.95 1,561,200 10.13 46,181 5.13 77,092 4.34 327,336
June 5.58 3,272 3.84 22,914 1.97 1,564,022 10.17 46,114 5.22 76,708 4.37 326,248
July 5.45 3,483 3.87 22,626 1.98 1,566,894 10.00 45,875 5.27 76,692 4.40 326,352
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2023 July 5.62 194,789 4.09 251,312 2.35 887,112
Aug. 5.72 188,564 4.17 251,445 2.37 889,482
Sep. 5.89 187,448 4.29 248,998 2.41 887,643
Oct. 6.05 186,407 4.42 251,931 2.45 889,648
Nov. 5.97 187,977 4.45 253,976 2.48 892,391
Dec. 6.05 180,730 4.50 255,561 2.51 891,507
2024 Jan. 6.06 183,005 4.53 255,411 2.52 893,128
Feb. 6.00 184,401 4.64 253,221 2.55 896,388
Mar. 6.03 189,482 4.62 249,544 2.56 895,185
Apr. 5.97 188,827 4.72 248,341 2.58 897,166
May 5.92 188,826 4.74 249,224 2.59 899,489
June 5.88 192,015 4.74 248,588 2.59 896,461
July 5.91 189,013 4.73 249,076 2.60 898,467
* The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate
statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the related volumes of
euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non-financial corporations
domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises individuals (including sole
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations
include all enterprises other than insurance corporations, banks and other financial
institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional.
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the
Bundesbank’s website (Statistics/Money and capital markets/Interest rates and
yields/Interest rates on deposits and loans).  o The statistics on outstanding amounts are
collected at the end of the month.  1 The effective interest rates are calculated either asannualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation
methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related
charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents,
guarantees and credit insurance.  2 Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics.
3 Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home
improvements; including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim
credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name
and for their own account.  4 Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for
the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services.  5 For the
purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as
business, debt consolidation, education, etc.  6 Including overdrafts (see also footnotes
12 to 14 on p. 47 ).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
45•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Households' deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice  8 of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2023 July 0.41 1,773,505 2.94 38,938 2.98 3,412 2.59 2,044 0.50 440,519 1.48 36,162
Aug. 0.51 1,757,994 3.12 46,037 3.15 4,422 2.81 2,374 0.55 429,372 1.62 38,895
Sep. 0.55 1,748,975 3.22 40,232 3.30 3,611 2.92 1,787 0.59 420,872 1.76 41,824
Oct. 0.56 1,728,935 3.40 51,187 3.46 5,558 2.99 2,743 0.64 411,490 1.94 44,837
Nov. 0.59 1,726,394 3.46 57,743 3.40 6,243 3.18 4,292 0.67 400,980 2.09 48,268
Dec. 0.60 1,731,513 3.37 49,974 3.25 4,896 3.17 4,389 0.69 396,006 2.17 50,818
2024 Jan. 0.62 1,702,116 3.27 56,368 3.13 5,846 2.80 3,300 0.71 386,987 2.25 53,387
Feb. 0.58 1,698,248 3.28 55,090 3.04 5,651 2.65 2,339 0.72 379,659 2.30 55,755
Mar. 0.60 1,698,313 3.27 47,316 2.94 3,332 2.53 2,296 0.74 373,900 2.35 57,421
Apr. 0.60 1,698,724 3.21 52,193 2.95 3,789 2.76 2,954 0.75 368,393 2.38 58,350
May 0.60 1,701,051 3.22 50,351 2.91 3,284 2.43 1,947 0.76 364,344 2.41 58,880
June 0.59 1,706,912 3.11 47,821 2.90 3,156 2.51 1,930 0.76 359,875 2.43 59,236
July 0.58 1,702,158 3.10 52,320 2.82 3,175 2.46 2,188 0.76 355,746 2.44 59,365
Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2023 July 0.72 551,199 3.34 79,832 3.53 614 3.26 252
Aug. 0.81 548,242 3.50 89,027 3.46 570 2.93 210
Sep. 0.92 548,230 3.64 95,610 3.63 807 2.96 287
Oct. 0.97 551,400 3.74 95,412 3.78 752 2.97 266
Nov. 1.02 556,270 3.73 99,933 3.71 820 3.30 418
Dec. 1.02 553,882 3.71 92,454 3.47 855 2.98 343
2024 Jan. 1.05 535,302 3.71 91,219 3.20 419 2.81 401
Feb. 1.03 524,848 3.70 94,014 3.16 527 2.90 239
Mar. 1.00 525,597 3.74 109,409 3.29 609 3.60 538
Apr. 1.01 527,442 3.74 109,540 3.46 815 3.68 573
May 1.06 535,774 3.71 99,982 3.58 1,720 3.63 1,543
June 1.00 530,169 3.56 104,386 3.46 1,187 3.60 1,248
July 1.02 545,681 3.51 102,522 3.51 1,347 3.46 842
Loans to households
Loans for consumption  4 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2023 July 8.40 8.35 8,628 9.32 1,609 10.92 295 7.04 2,974 8.94 5,359
Aug. 8.46 8.43 8,818 9.46 1,689 10.65 288 7.13 3,011 9.02 5,518
Sep. 8.57 8.47 8,036 9.53 1,530 10.21 274 7.18 2,798 9.11 4,964
Oct. 8.66 8.55 8,347 9.62 1,655 9.43 288 7.21 2,893 9.24 5,166
Nov. 8.72 8.55 8,130 9.70 1,626 8.45 329 7.29 2,863 9.29 4,938
Dec. 8.69 8.25 6,106 9.28 905 7.99 298 7.22 2,491 9.04 3,317
2024 Jan. 8.73 8.49 8,062 9.55 1,563 7.86 261 7.30 2,718 9.16 5,082
Feb. 8.56 8.34 8,245 9.24 1,308 7.86 262 7.24 2,909 8.99 5,073
Mar. 8.27 8.03 8,190 9.21 1,250 8.15 260 6.87 3,173 8.79 4,757
Apr. 8.34 8.07 9,080 9.32 1,348 7.46 320 6.91 3,581 8.91 5,180
May 8.46 8.16 8,491 9.36 1,229 7.04 328 7.09 3,330 8.97 4,833
June 8.29 8.03 8,426 9.19 1,234 6.76 304 6.95 3,359 8.86 4,763
July 8.33 8.09 9,922 9.30 1,497 7.02 332 6.90 3,919 8.98 5,672
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnote x see p. 47●. + For deposits with
an agreed maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card
debt: new business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial
corporations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted
average rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. For
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts,
credit card debt: new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for
the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending business atthe end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average rates of
interest.  7 Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form the
underlying total using a grossing-up procedure.  8 Including non-financial corporations’
deposits; including fidelity and growth premiums.  9 Excluding overdrafts.  10 Annual
percentage rate of charge, which contains other related charges which may occur for
enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit
insurance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
46•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd)
Loans to households for other purposes  5 with an initial rate fixation of
Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Loans to households 
2023 July 4.96 4,086 4.54 1,161 5.39 1,766 5.12 933 4.31 1,387
Aug. 5.16 3,430 5.02 882 5.72 1,290 5.24 910 4.50 1,230
Sep. 5.24 3,526 5.08 814 5.76 1,489 5.29 848 4.54 1,189
Oct. 5.45 3,348 5.37 1,068 5.95 1,483 5.57 724 4.73 1,141
Nov. 5.43 3,152 5.13 765 5.90 1,345 5.53 764 4.76 1,043
Dec. 5.20 4,287 5.21 988 5.77 1,719 5.12 1,234 4.54 1,334
2024 Jan. 5.23 3,673 5.02 1,102 5.78 1,717 5.26 823 4.38 1,133
Feb. 5.13 2,997 5.13 703 5.73 1,237 5.24 675 4.36 1,085
Mar. 4.91 3,987 5.08 953 5.68 1,522 5.16 814 4.07 1,651
Apr. 5.05 3,544 4.99 1,093 5.67 1,314 5.26 891 4.30 1,339
May 4.99 3,199 5.00 881 5.48 1,288 5.19 749 4.32 1,162
June 4.98 3,711 5.01 860 5.55 1,479 5.23 838 4.23 1,394
July 4.80 4,133 4.67 1,226 5.32 1,642 5.14 768 4.16 1,723
    of which: Loans to sole proprietors
2023 July 5.09 2,963 . . 5.48 1,337 5.48 592 4.37 1,034
Aug. 5.30 2,381 . . 5.91 934 5.55 551 4.53 896
Sep. 5.32 2,459 . . 5.80 1,094 5.57 523 4.55 842
Oct. 5.52 2,472 . . 6.03 1,094 5.67 547 4.74 831
Nov. 5.52 2,249 . . 6.06 900 5.60 587 4.82 762
Dec. 5.42 2,861 . . 5.93 1,256 5.58 660 4.63 945
2024 Jan. 5.33 2,814 . . 5.88 1,335 5.34 656 4.42 823
Feb. 5.22 2,274 . . 5.82 908 5.40 573 4.40 793
Mar. 4.96 3,188 . . 5.75 1,215 5.25 700 4.05 1,273
Apr. 5.08 2,756 . . 5.70 962 5.39 760 4.27 1,034
May 5.09 2,320 . . 5.57 859 5.34 643 4.38 818
June 5.08 2,844 . . 5.67 1,109 5.35 683 4.29 1,052
July 4.88 3,149 . . 5.37 1,226 5.27 650 4.20 1,273
Loans to households (cont'd)
Housing loans  3 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 yearsover 5 year and
up to 10 years over 10 years
Erhebungs-
zeitraumAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2023 July 4.08 4.02 14,335 4.03 2,845 5.20 1,949 4.37 1,469 3.71 5,352 3.82 5,564
Aug. 4.19 4.14 14,386 4.43 2,611 5.29 2,198 4.53 1,388 3.81 5,275 3.89 5,525
Sep. 4.17 4.12 12,286 4.32 2,017 5.40 1,523 4.48 1,171 3.89 4,534 3.85 5,058
Oct. 4.22 4.18 13,831 4.39 2,853 5.53 1,989 4.53 1,403 3.85 5,304 3.90 5,136
Nov. 4.27 4.22 13,473 4.56 2,236 5.62 1,723 4.61 1,588 3.92 4,936 3.92 5,225
Dec. 4.12 4.05 12,151 4.32 2,055 5.56 1,576 4.44 1,553 3.80 4,349 3.65 4,672
2024 Jan. 3.90 3.85 14,667 4.10 2,844 5.44 1,862 4.08 1,584 3.56 5,397 3.55 5,825
Feb. 3.92 3.88 14,245 4.30 2,429 5.41 1,783 4.04 1,612 3.59 5,153 3.61 5,697
Mar. 3.88 3.83 15,439 4.01 2,258 5.28 1,739 4.09 1,755 3.55 5,414 3.61 6,530
Apr. 3.91 3.86 16,793 4.21 2,754 5.45 1,869 4.06 1,868 3.57 6,234 3.64 6,822
May 3.96 3.91 15,403 4.19 2,277 5.44 1,828 4.14 1,480 3.60 6,051 3.69 6,044
June 3.99 3.95 16,296 4.33 2,186 5.51 2,039 4.19 1,476 3.66 6,163 3.68 6,618
July 3.96 3.92 19,537 4.20 3,183 5.37 2,348 4.14 1,842 3.63 7,561 3.71 7,787
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2023 July . 3.88 6,592 . . 5.08 729 4.20 661 3.63 2,384 3.72 2,818
Aug. . 3.96 6,467 . . 5.10 767 4.29 637 3.73 2,399 3.75 2,664
Sep. . 3.93 5,704 . . 5.36 540 4.32 551 3.78 2,092 3.65 2,521
Oct. . 4.01 6,207 . . 5.44 769 4.38 587 3.73 2,335 3.76 2,516
Nov. . 4.02 6,174 . . 5.50 669 4.45 728 3.80 2,170 3.70 2,607
Dec. . 3.86 5,588 . . 5.39 612 4.29 609 3.73 1,935 3.47 2,432
2024 Jan. . 3.69 7,051 . . 5.34 706 3.96 746 3.44 2,461 3.45 3,138
Feb. . 3.70 6,827 . . 5.33 717 3.82 764 3.43 2,314 3.50 3,032
Mar. . 3.66 7,324 . . 5.00 737 3.91 762 3.43 2,491 3.49 3,334
Apr. . 3.74 7,898 . . 5.48 783 3.88 853 3.48 2,770 3.53 3,492
May . 3.77 6,873 . . 5.35 740 3.97 677 3.48 2,483 3.57 2,973
June . 3.78 7,745 . . 5.43 844 4.03 682 3.54 2,777 3.52 3,442
July . 3.77 8,866 . . 5.27 878 3.97 810 3.55 3,291 3.59 3,887
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
footnote 11, see p. 47●.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
47•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which: of which:
Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13Extended
credit card debtRevolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2023 July 10.32 38,818 10.48 27,182 17.58 6,580 6.00 98,185 6.03 97,770
Aug. 10.39 39,026 10.60 27,146 17.79 6,611 6.11 94,939 6.14 94,514
Sep. 10.59 39,548 10.75 27,976 17.86 6,629 6.25 95,468 6.28 95,004
Oct. 10.82 39,186 11.02 27,570 18.09 6,656 6.42 94,418 6.45 93,913
Nov. 10.80 38,416 10.95 26,932 18.18 6,614 6.41 95,688 6.44 95,191
Dec. 10.76 39,266 11.03 27,422 18.17 6,609 6.49 92,617 6.52 92,164
2024 Jan. 11.03 38,673 11.19 27,497 18.22 6,534 6.48 93,839 6.51 93,367
Feb. 11.06 38,233 11.22 27,163 18.29 6,460 6.47 95,704 6.50 95,225
Mar. 10.88 39,566 11.17 27,767 18.66 6,459 6.48 97,035 6.51 96,538
Apr. 11.00 38,415 11.19 27,036 18.65 6,438 6.37 96,481 6.40 95,979
May 10.95 38,754 11.23 27,112 18.66 6,427 6.38 96,257 6.41 95,778
June 10.96 38,787 11.09 27,550 18.67 6,425 6.32 98,856 6.35 98,366
July 10.76 38,597 11.05 26,763 18.61 6,442 6.34 96,984 6.37 96,495
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which: Loans up to €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of Loans over €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of
TotalRenegotiated
loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 yearsfloating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2023 July 5.06 85,629 4.88 28,176 6.39 10,764 6.54 1,838 4.35 1,167 4.91 61,061 5.32 3,989 3.94 6,810
Aug. 5.11 73,312 5.15 21,335 6.01 10,015 6.63 1,698 4.46 999 5.06 51,942 4.47 3,017 3.95 5,641
Sep. 5.16 83,317 5.30 25,702 6.04 10,804 6.76 1,689 4.35 959 5.09 60,497 5.03 3,077 4.10 6,291
Oct. 5.39 76,734 5.27 24,750 6.35 10,963 6.93 1,781 4.61 912 5.30 54,862 5.02 3,674 4.11 4,542
Nov. 5.17 79,316 5.28 22,467 6.27 10,430 6.87 1,838 4.50 936 5.07 56,524 4.66 3,644 4.10 5,944
Dec. 5.19 108,487 5.34 31,589 6.07 11,245 6.60 2,020 4.33 1,115 5.28 76,500 4.63 7,141 3.79 10,466
2024 Jan. 5.16 75,818 5.37 22,554 5.81 10,279 6.48 1,856 4.21 932 5.18 54,103 4.51 3,830 3.64 4,818
Feb. 5.06 72,892 5.36 18,973 5.77 10,256 6.77 1,809 4.19 879 5.19 49,631 3.29 6,114 3.85 4,203
Mar. 5.19 94,238 5.42 27,803 5.64 12,574 6.70 1,930 4.24 1,017 5.27 67,328 4.29 5,644 3.79 5,745
Apr. 5.20 79,786 5.35 23,180 5.67 9,851 6.60 3,249 4.20 1,118 5.24 56,030 4.40 4,605 3.84 4,933
May 5.10 82,546 5.27 20,970 5.67 10,468 6.62 3,568 4.24 961 5.13 57,369 4.12 4,985 3.69 5,195
June 5.06 101,220 5.11 31,097 5.59 11,582 6.58 4,052 4.26 984 5.07 71,086 4.49 6,869 3.75 6,647
July 4.98 83,596 5.12 23,407 5.57 10,490 6.50 3,673 4.22 1,237 5.03 55,414 4.14 5,723 3.73 7,059
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2023 July 4.86 11,078 . . 5.44 489 4.91 126 3.98 325 4.87 6,823 5.86 1,544 3.94 1,771
Aug. 5.08 9,797 . . 5.58 425 5.01 122 3.85 279 5.45 6,747 4.32 890 3.79 1,334
Sep. . . . . 5.63 450 5.28 109 3.88 253 . . 5.19 1,187 3.76 1,487
Oct. 5.05 12,103 . . 5.66 508 5.14 140 3.95 213 5.21 8,840 5.38 1,005 3.73 1,397
Nov. 4.69 10,586 . . 5.73 353 4.83 107 3.88 250 4.90 7,211 4.51 1,045 3.74 1,620
Dec. 4.83 15,673 . . 5.55 459 5.01 139 3.82 291 5.22 10,040 4.81 1,915 3.45 2,829
2024 Jan. 4.78 8,277 . . 5.69 446 4.64 150 3.68 250 5.04 5,880 4.09 707 3.41 844
Feb. 4.87 7,393 . . 5.68 351 4.70 113 3.60 231 5.16 5,054 4.55 846 3.45 798
Mar. 5.03 11,566 . . 5.74 412 4.91 99 3.75 277 5.24 8,292 5.35 1,271 3.39 1,215
Apr. 4.81 8,922 . . 5.61 457 4.90 159 3.69 272 4.93 5,989 5.13 1,001 3.77 1,044
May 4.79 8,862 . . 5.64 356 4.62 151 3.76 247 5.13 5,522 4.71 1,249 3.46 1,337
June 4.97 12,576 . . 5.61 392 4.68 173 3.55 251 5.34 7,255 4.86 2,681 3.73 1,824
July 4.63 10,573 . . 5.44 485 4.87 162 3.81 305 5.06 6,631 3.88 1,646 3.27 1,344
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
11 For the purposes of the interest rate statistics, a loan is considered to be secured if
collateral (amongst others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at
least the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned.
12 Including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower
may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior
notice to the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as
funds are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no
obligation of regular repayment of funds.  13 Overdrafts are defined as debit balanceson current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are
within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank.  14 Including
convenience and extended credit card debt. Convenience credit is defined as the credit
granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period between payment transactions effected
with the card during one billing cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this
specific billing cycle become due.  15 The amount category refers to the single loan
transaction considered as new business.  x Dominated by the business of one or two
banks. Therefore, the value cannot be published due to confidentiality.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
48•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets
€ billion
End of
year/quarter TotalCurrency
and
deposits  1Debt
securities Loans  2Shares and
other equityInvestment
fund
shares/unitsFinancial
derivativesTechnical
reserves  3Non-financial
assetsRemaining
assets
Insurance corporations 
2021 Q3 2,653.1 271.7 474.2 358.2 463.4 899.8 3.3 87.8 38.3 56.3
Q4 2,667.2 261.3 468.6 355.1 472.4 921.6 3.2 85.0 40.8 59.3
2022 Q1 2,547.3 243.7 440.2 333.2 468.7 870.5 2.7 87.5 41.0 59.8
Q2 2,369.8 215.6 390.4 305.5 462.5 803.5 3.0 85.5 41.3 62.6
Q3 2,296.3 202.1 369.9 289.1 461.3 776.7 4.0 84.3 41.4 67.6
Q4 2,275.6 189.7 373.8 279.7 466.0 772.1 3.4 79.9 38.7 72.2
2023 Q1 2,326.7 201.6 380.7 280.4 472.6 790.1 3.6 85.0 38.5 74.3
Q2 2,331.8 194.8 383.4 280.4 475.6 799.2 3.6 83.9 38.1 72.9
Q3 2,311.1 186.5 376.7 274.2 483.4 785.3 3.7 88.6 38.1 74.7
Q4 2,408.5 190.2 405.6 291.0 499.7 822.6 3.3 79.0 34.2 83.0
2024 Q1 2,477.6 193.7 412.6 289.4 502.9 847.6 3.7 97.0 35.1 95.5
    Life insurance
2021 Q3 1,400.1 159.2 233.8 214.8 87.7 654.6 1.9 13.4 20.8 13.8
Q4 1,411.1 152.4 231.9 211.8 93.4 669.1 1.7 14.6 21.9 14.3
2022 Q1 1,317.8 136.8 211.5 193.1 99.7 626.1 0.9 13.9 22.0 13.8
Q2 1,202.1 120.5 180.3 173.1 104.2 569.4 0.9 13.6 22.1 17.9
Q3 1,149.6 110.2 166.6 162.1 107.0 546.4 1.1 12.3 22.3 21.7
Q4 1,130.1 103.6 170.5 155.6 111.5 540.0 1.1 11.5 19.5 16.8
2023 Q1 1,147.9 105.1 170.3 155.6 113.3 553.5 1.0 12.1 19.4 17.4
Q2 1,154.0 102.9 171.7 154.9 114.3 559.9 1.0 12.0 19.2 18.0
Q3 1,123.5 97.9 163.2 149.4 115.7 547.2 1.5 11.7 19.1 17.9
Q4 1,180.4 101.5 178.7 161.0 116.6 574.7 1.4 10.3 16.6 19.5
2024 Q1 1,193.5 98.6 176.5 156.0 115.6 594.3 1.4 10.2 16.6 24.3
    Non-life insurance
2021 Q3 733.1 98.7 141.0 83.8 93.7 228.4 0.4 46.4 12.8 27.7
Q4 738.4 94.6 140.1 84.7 97.5 234.3 0.3 44.6 14.0 28.4
2022 Q1 722.5 91.5 133.4 80.8 98.6 227.7 0.2 45.7 13.9 30.7
Q2 681.7 81.9 122.0 74.9 98.6 216.5 0.1 44.1 14.1 29.5
Q3 661.2 76.2 116.1 70.3 99.2 212.3 0.1 43.2 14.1 29.7
Q4 659.9 72.9 115.3 69.0 100.0 215.5 0.2 42.8 14.2 30.1
2023 Q1 687.1 81.2 121.1 69.7 103.0 219.5 0.1 45.1 14.2 33.2
Q2 688.3 77.2 124.0 70.7 104.4 222.0 0.1 44.9 14.1 30.9
Q3 682.7 73.7 122.7 69.2 107.0 221.0 0.1 45.3 14.3 29.4
Q4 708.1 74.9 131.9 74.1 109.0 230.1 0.1 43.9 13.0 31.1
2024 Q1 748.8 81.0 139.5 75.3 110.6 234.6 0.1 55.8 13.9 38.0
    Reinsurance 4
2021 Q3 519.9 13.9 99.3 59.6 282.0 16.7 1.0 28.0 4.7 14.8
Q4 517.7 14.3 96.6 58.6 281.4 18.2 1.1 25.9 4.9 16.7
2022 Q1 507.1 15.5 95.3 59.3 270.4 16.7 1.6 27.9 5.0 15.3
Q2 486.0 13.2 88.0 57.5 259.6 17.6 1.9 27.9 5.1 15.1
Q3 485.5 15.6 87.3 56.7 255.1 18.1 2.7 28.8 5.1 16.2
Q4 485.6 13.2 88.0 55.1 254.5 16.7 2.1 25.7 5.0 25.3
2023 Q1 491.8 15.3 89.2 55.1 256.3 17.1 2.4 27.8 4.8 23.7
Q2 489.5 14.7 87.6 54.8 256.9 17.2 2.5 26.9 4.8 24.0
Q3 504.9 14.8 90.8 55.6 260.7 17.1 2.1 31.6 4.8 27.3
Q4 520.0 13.7 95.0 55.9 274.1 17.8 1.8 24.7 4.6 32.4
2024 Q1 535.3 14.2 96.6 58.1 276.6 18.7 2.2 31.0 4.6 33.2
Pension funds 5
2021 Q3 689.8 82.9 60.4 48.9 11.8 453.6 0.1 12.2 17.8 2.2
Q4 709.9 82.1 60.0 48.7 11.3 473.5 0.1 12.4 18.5 3.3
2022 Q1 689.8 75.8 56.7 46.2 12.0 465.9 0.0 12.4 18.5 2.2
Q2 665.9 70.3 52.9 43.3 12.5 453.5 0.0 12.3 18.6 2.5
Q3 657.0 67.7 52.0 42.1 12.9 448.1 0.0 12.9 18.7 2.6
Q4 664.0 67.3 54.6 41.9 13.6 451.3 0.0 13.1 18.8 3.5
2023 Q1 671.5 66.4 56.9 42.3 13.6 457.9 0.0 12.9 18.7 2.7
Q2 678.7 67.5 58.9 42.7 13.4 462.0 0.0 12.9 18.7 2.6
Q3 675.9 67.1 60.3 42.3 13.5 458.2 0.1 12.9 18.7 2.8
Q4 703.5 70.1 67.7 44.0 13.5 472.6 0.1 13.2 18.9 3.4
2024 Q1 712.1 70.6 69.8 44.2 13.6 480.3 0.1 12.4 18.6 2.6
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections.  1 Accounts receivable to monetary financial institutions, including
registered bonds, borrower's note loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including
deposits retained on assumed reinsurance as well as registered bonds, borrower's note
loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  3 Including reinsurance recoverables and claims ofpension funds on pension managers.  4 Not including the reinsurance business
conducted by primary insurers, which is included there.  5 The term "pension funds"
refers to the institutional sector "pension funds" of the European System of Accounts.
Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational pension
schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
49•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
2. Liabilities
€ billion
Technical reserves
End of
year/quarter TotalDebt
securities
issued Loans  1Shares and
other equity Total  2Life/
pension
entitlements  3 Non-lifeFinancial
derivativesRemaining
liabilities Net worth  6
Insurance corporations
2021 Q3 2,653.1 35.4 82.8 567.0 1,817.7 1,569.1 248.7 2.5 147.6 –
Q4 2,667.2 36.0 82.0 579.3 1,820.7 1,578.3 242.3 2.5 146.8 –
2022 Q1 2,547.3 34.4 82.1 563.2 1,725.9 1,472.6 253.3 4.0 137.7 –
Q2 2,369.8 33.6 78.7 541.7 1,574.4 1,326.8 247.6 6.0 135.3 –
Q3 2,296.3 33.8 73.6 537.5 1,506.1 1,262.3 243.7 7.4 138.0 –
Q4 2,275.6 32.3 70.1 544.0 1,487.0 1,248.7 238.3 5.6 136.7 –
2023 Q1 2,326.7 33.1 71.2 544.7 1,539.0 1,277.3 261.7 4.3 134.3 –
Q2 2,331.8 33.1 68.4 548.0 1,544.4 1,284.6 259.8 4.4 133.5 –
Q3 2,311.1 35.3 76.9 552.1 1,508.1 1,248.1 260.1 4.6 134.1 –
Q4 2,408.5 30.5 73.3 569.8 1,586.6 1,325.4 261.2 4.1 144.1 –
2024 Q1 2,477.6 30.6 78.1 575.0 1,642.5 1,345.5 296.9 3.7 147.8 –
    Life insurance
2021 Q3 1,400.1 3.3 19.3 148.1 1,176.4 1,176.4 – 1.1 51.9 –
Q4 1,411.1 3.3 20.7 148.2 1,185.5 1,185.5 – 0.9 52.5 –
2022 Q1 1,317.8 3.2 19.9 142.9 1,101.6 1,101.6 – 1.4 48.8 –
Q2 1,202.1 3.1 19.0 141.4 984.5 984.5 – 2.7 51.3 –
Q3 1,149.6 3.0 17.0 138.0 936.9 936.9 – 3.1 51.8 –
Q4 1,130.1 2.7 16.6 136.0 924.9 924.9 – 2.3 47.7 –
2023 Q1 1,147.9 2.7 17.8 132.9 946.0 946.0 – 1.9 46.6 –
Q2 1,154.0 2.7 17.6 133.6 951.7 951.7 – 1.7 46.8 –
Q3 1,123.5 2.7 16.9 134.1 919.9 919.9 – 2.4 47.6 –
Q4 1,180.4 0.8 17.7 133.3 977.7 977.7 – 2.0 48.8 –
2024 Q1 1,193.5 0.8 17.5 128.8 994.3 994.3 – 1.7 50.2 –
    Non-life insurance
2021 Q3 733.1 1.2 10.5 168.9 498.7 367.8 130.9 0.2 53.7 –
Q4 738.4 1.4 10.7 175.8 492.6 367.6 125.0 0.2 57.8 –
2022 Q1 722.5 1.3 11.7 173.1 483.0 347.1 136.0 0.3 53.0 –
Q2 681.7 1.2 11.1 167.7 451.9 322.7 129.2 0.5 49.3 –
Q3 661.2 1.2 10.5 168.0 430.5 307.4 123.1 0.5 50.5 –
Q4 659.9 1.2 10.4 170.4 425.6 306.7 118.9 0.4 52.0 –
2023 Q1 687.1 1.2 10.7 173.0 450.8 314.4 136.4 0.4 51.0 –
Q2 688.3 1.2 10.6 176.0 451.1 317.1 134.0 0.3 49.1 –
Q3 682.7 1.7 10.9 176.6 444.4 313.0 131.4 0.4 48.8 –
Q4 708.1 0.6 12.5 180.2 461.3 333.6 127.7 0.3 53.3 –
2024 Q1 748.8 0.6 13.4 184.6 494.5 337.1 157.4 0.3 55.5 –
    Reinsurance 4
2021 Q3 519.9 30.9 53.0 250.1 142.7 24.9 117.8 1.3 42.0 –
Q4 517.7 31.4 50.5 255.3 142.6 25.3 117.3 1.4 36.5 –
2022 Q1 507.1 30.0 50.4 247.2 141.3 23.9 117.4 2.3 35.9 –
Q2 486.0 29.3 48.6 232.6 138.0 19.6 118.4 2.8 34.7 –
Q3 485.5 29.7 46.2 231.5 138.7 18.0 120.7 3.8 35.7 –
Q4 485.6 28.4 43.1 237.5 136.5 17.1 119.4 2.9 37.1 –
2023 Q1 491.8 29.2 42.8 238.8 142.2 16.9 125.3 2.1 36.8 –
Q2 489.5 29.3 40.2 238.4 141.6 15.8 125.8 2.4 37.6 –
Q3 504.9 31.0 49.2 241.3 143.9 15.2 128.7 1.9 37.7 –
Q4 520.0 29.1 43.0 256.3 147.7 14.2 133.5 1.8 42.0 –
2024 Q1 535.3 29.1 47.2 261.6 153.7 14.1 139.6 1.7 42.0 –
Pension funds 5
2021 Q3 689.8 – 1.9 31.9 539.8 537.6 – 0.2 9.3 106.8
Q4 709.9 – 1.9 32.0 560.2 557.3 – 0.1 8.9 106.8
2022 Q1 689.8 – 2.0 33.5 559.7 556.9 – 0.1 9.5 85.1
Q2 665.9 – 1.8 33.5 561.0 558.4 – 0.1 9.0 60.4
Q3 657.0 – 1.9 34.7 563.1 560.6 – 0.1 9.7 47.5
Q4 664.0 – 1.8 34.5 576.4 573.9 – 0.1 9.4 41.8
2023 Q1 671.5 – 1.8 35.5 577.3 574.9 – 0.1 9.5 47.3
Q2 678.7 – 1.8 35.7 582.0 579.6 – 0.1 9.6 49.5
Q3 675.9 – 1.9 35.0 583.7 581.5 – 0.1 9.7 45.6
Q4 703.5 – 1.9 35.0 597.0 594.8 – 0.1 9.9 59.6
2024 Q1 712.1 – 1.9 36.0 600.0 597.7 – 0.1 9.6 64.6
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections.  1 Including deposits retained on ceded business as well as registered
bonds, borrower's note loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including claims of pension
funds on pension managers and entitlements to non-pension benefits.  3 Technical
reserves "life" taking account of transitional measures. Health insurance is also includedin the "non-life insurance" sector.  4 Not including the reinsurance business conducted
by primary insurers, which is included there.  5 Valuation at book values. The term "pen-
sion funds" refers to the institutional sector "pension funds" of the European System of
Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational
pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included.  6 Own
funds correspond to the sum of "Net worth" and "Shares and other equity".

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
50•
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases TotalBank
debt
securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt
secur-
itiesForeign
debt
secur-
ities  3 Total  4Credit in-
stitutions
including
building
and loan
associations  5Deutsche
BundesbankOther
sectors  6Non-
residents  7
2012 51,813 –21,419 –98,820 – 8,701 86,103 73,231 – 3,767 – 42,017 – 3,573 41,823 55,581
2013 – 15,971 –101,616 –117,187 153 15,415 85,645 16,409 – 25,778 – 12,708 54,895 – 32,379
2014 58,735 –31,962 –47,404 – 1,330 16,776 90,697 44,384 – 12,124 – 11,951 68,459 14,351
2015 15,219 –36,010 –65,778 26,762 3,006 51,229 99,225 – 66,330 121,164 44,391 – 84,006
2016 68,998 27,429 19,177 18,265 –10,012 41,569 161,776 – 58,012 187,500 32,288 – 92,778
2017 51,034 11,563 1,096 7,112 3,356 39,471 134,192 – 71,454 161,012 44,634 – 83,158
2018 78,657 16,630 33,251 12,433 –29,055 62,027 107,155 – 24,417 67,328 64,244 – 28,499
2019 139,611 68,536 29,254 32,505 6,778 71,075 60,195 8,059 2,408 49,728 79,416
2020 451,481 374,034 14,462 88,703 270,870 77,446 280,820 18,955 226,887 34,978 170,661
2021 230,854 221,648 31,941 19,754 169,953 9,205 243,497 – 41,852 245,198 40,150 – 12,643
2022 150,974 156,190 59,322 35,221 61,648 – 5,216 143,527 2,915 49,774 90,839 7,447
2023 289,352 158,228 88,018 –11,899 82,109 131,124 126,229 32,163 – 59,817 153,883 163,123
2023 Aug. 17,661 10,967 10,278 – 1,708 2,397 6,694 3,128 503 – 9,067 11,691 14,533
Sep. 19,604 16,310 – 7,089 6,461 16,938 3,294 – 4,880 – 8,020 – 11,311 14,451 24,484
Oct. – 20,618 –19,390 1,677 –10,955 –10,113 – 1,227 – 13,989 – 4,855 – 6,759 – 2,375 – 6,628
Nov. 28,453 18,861 9,439 – 3,337 12,759 9,592 9,557 10,752 – 5,186 3,992 18,896
Dec. – 20,319 –27,517 4,368 – 8,386 –23,499 7,199 – 8,134 – 7,024 – 5,130 4,020 – 12,185
2024 Jan. 30,652 25,509 8,437 6,301 10,771 5,143 6,259 17,106 – 7,128 – 3,718 24,392
Feb. 19,146 11,577 6,463 – 957 6,070 7,569 3,675 7,562 – 9,079 5,191 15,471
Mar. 42,591 15,188 13,915 3,072 – 1,799 27,402 19,477 16,349 – 4,776 7,905 23,113
Apr. – 27,913 –25,395 –10,665 6,215 –20,946 – 2,518 – 31,713 – 4,492 – 12,041 – 15,181 3,800
May 27,055 22,035 1,836 696 19,503 5,020 17,293 3,605 – 9,394 23,082 9,761
June 33,743 14,811 10,021 2,760 2,031 18,932 4,988 12,204 – 10,121 2,905 28,755
July 5,646 – 1,308 –17,935 – 1,038 17,665 6,954 – 5,604 1,835 – 5,220 – 2,220 11,250
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
purchasesDomestic
shares  8Foreign
shares  9 Total  10Credit insti-
tutions  5 Other sectors  11Non-
residents  12
2012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 656
2013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,337 11,991 5,346 2,851
2014 43,488 18,778 24,710 43,930 17,203 26,727 – 443
2015 56,979 7,668 49,311 46,721 – 5,421 52,142 10,258
2016 39,133 4,409 34,724 39,265 – 5,143 44,408 – 132
2017 52,932 15,570 37,362 51,270 7,031 44,239 1,662
2018 61,400 16,188 45,212 89,624 – 11,184 100,808 – 28,224
2019 54,830 9,076 45,754 43,070 – 1,119 44,189 11,759
2020 78,464 17,771 60,693 111,570 27 111,543 – 33,106
2021 115,933 49,066 66,868 102,921 10,869 92,052 13,012
2022 – 6,275 27,792 – 34,066 2,997 – 8,262 11,259 – 9,272
2023 41,999 36,898 5,101 52,912 14,650 38,262 – 10,913
2023 Aug. 766 1,474 – 707 3,833 – 893 4,726 – 3,067
Sep. – 4,577 687 – 5,265 – 3,470 1,962 – 5,432 – 1,107
Oct. 564 583 – 18 3,007 – 88 3,095 – 2,442
Nov. 591 301 290 – 2,437 538 – 2,975 3,028
Dec. 27,982 24,942 3,039 26,378 6,437 19,941 1,604
2024 Jan. 282 351 – 69 2,171 – 1,361 3,532 – 1,888
Feb. – 856 206 – 1,062 – 626 4,247 – 4,873 – 230
Mar. 7,233 4,679 2,554 9,297 6,657 2,640 – 2,064
Apr. 1,852 1,546 306 2,664 – 2,481 5,145 – 812
May 5,034 474 4,561 4,416 3,531 885 619
June – 1,682 292 – 1,974 – 2,637 – 4,084 1,447 955
July 2,773 204 2,569 3,836 40 3,796 – 1,063
1 Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers' portfolios of their own debt
securities.  2 Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction values.
4 Domestic and foreign debt securities.  5 Book values; statistically adjusted.  6 Residual;
also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.
Up to end-2008 including Deutsche Bundesbank.  7 Net purchases or net sales (-) of do-
mestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction values.  8 Excluding shares of publiclimited investment companies; at issue prices.  9 Net purchases or net sales (-) of foreign
shares (including direct investment) by residents; transaction values.  10 Domestic
and foreign shares.  11 Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign
securities by domestic mutual funds.  12 Net purchases or net sales (-) of domestic
shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The figures
for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
51•
VIII. Capital market
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities  1
Period Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by special-
purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt securities
Gross sales
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,258 574,530
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,892
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,675 400,701
3 2016 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,371 416,108
3 2017 1,047,822 619,199 30,339 8,933 438,463 141,466 66,290 362,332
2018 1,148,091 703,416 38,658 5,673 534,552 124,530 91,179 353,496
2019 1,285,541 783,977 38,984 9,587 607,900 127,504 94,367 407,197
6 2020 1,870,084 778,411 39,548 18,327 643,380 77,156 184,206 907,466
2021 1,658,004 795,271 41,866 17,293 648,996 87,116 139,775 722,958
2022 1,683,265 861,989 66,811 11,929 700,062 83,188 169,680 651,596
2023 1,705,524 937,757 45,073 12,633 782,969 97,082 153,128 614,639
2023 Aug. 142,211 82,749 3,085 1,013 71,729 6,922 10,064 49,397
Sep. 152,408 82,679 3,337 550 71,155 7,637 18,722 51,007
Oct. 132,402 83,350 1,697 2,557 71,328 7,769 10,151 38,901
Nov. 125,657 72,915 7,203 1,354 57,521 6,837 8,850 43,892
Dec. 81,025 55,000 1,834 1,453 46,549 5,164 4,722 21,302
2024 Jan. 151,286 89,021 6,405 1,630 70,605 10,380 14,833 47,433
Feb. 148,430 79,876 3,301 2,051 63,439 11,086 7,181 61,373
Mar. 124,684 62,659 5,081 608 45,393 11,577 11,709 50,316
Apr. 150,134 84,574 5,951 1,213 66,287 11,124 13,211 52,349
May 143,782 78,455 1,463 1,027 66,133 9,832 12,237 53,091
June 118,188 58,371 3,127 887 45,597 8,759 10,682 49,136
July 119,510 65,468 3,280 1,522 49,131 11,537 9,338 44,704
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years 4
2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888
2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765
2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
3 2016 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
3 2017 357,506 170,357 22,395 6,447 94,852 46,663 44,891 142,257
2018 375,906 173,995 30,934 4,460 100,539 38,061 69,150 132,760
2019 396,617 174,390 26,832 6,541 96,673 44,346 69,682 152,544
6 2020 658,521 165,097 28,500 7,427 90,839 38,330 77,439 415,985
2021 486,335 171,799 30,767 6,336 97,816 36,880 64,234 250,303
2022 485,287 164,864 41,052 7,139 91,143 25,530 56,491 263,932
2023 482,193 155,790 28,294 4,664 101,059 21,772 44,272 282,132
2023 Aug. 36,582 12,501 2,383 1,000 8,182 936 1,656 22,425
Sep. 40,995 8,847 2,250 – 5,127 1,470 8,741 23,407
Oct. 37,642 15,411 262 20 11,876 3,253 2,456 19,775
Nov. 35,532 13,641 6,703 600 4,135 2,203 2,541 19,350
Dec. 14,764 6,401 1,040 1,205 2,551 1,605 763 7,600
2024 Jan. 55,105 23,961 5,330 537 14,875 3,219 8,244 22,900
Feb. 53,198 21,778 1,920 1,251 15,159 3,448 1,870 29,550
Mar. 44,606 12,428 4,590 606 4,928 2,304 6,478 25,700
Apr. 47,632 18,861 3,459 1,026 9,789 4,587 5,921 22,850
May 45,810 13,637 328 1,027 9,717 2,564 5,248 26,925
June 30,324 7,312 1,022 852 2,049 3,389 3,162 19,850
July 34,845 11,543 2,034 1,522 4,939 3,049 2,582 20,720
Net sales 5
2012 – 85,298 – 100,198 – 4,177 – 41,660 – 3,259 – 51,099 – 6,401 21,298
2013 – 140,017 – 125,932 – 17,364 – 37,778 – 4,027 – 66,760 1,394 – 15,479
2014 – 34,020 – 56,899 – 6,313 – 23,856 – 862 – 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 – 65,147 – 77,273 9,271 – 9,754 – 2,758 – 74,028 25,300 – 13,174
3 2016 21,951 10,792 2,176 – 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 – 7,020
3 2017 2,669 5,954 6,389 – 4,697 18,788 – 14,525 6,828 – 10,114
2018 2,758 26,648 19,814 – 6,564 18,850 – 5,453 9,738 – 33,630
2019 59,719 28,750 13,098 – 3,728 26,263 – 6,885 30,449 519
6 2020 473,795 28,147 8,661 8,816 22,067 – 11,398 49,536 396,113
2021 210,231 52,578 17,821 7,471 22,973 4,314 35,531 122,123
2022 135,853 36,883 23,894 – 9,399 15,944 6,444 30,671 68,299
2023 190,577 78,764 10,184 – 791 46,069 23,303 – 34 111,848
2023 Aug. 15,869 9,610 2,930 541 7,387 – 1,249 – 1,791 8,050
Sep. 12,991 – 6,384 28 – 809 – 4,706 – 897 8,074 11,300
Oct. – 7,927 – 1,596 – 2,527 – 1,529 – 895 3,356 – 2,197 – 4,135
Nov. 30,649 13,427 4,984 904 7,149 391 – 4,018 21,239
Dec. – 11,217 10,301 308 1,288 9,314 – 609 – 4,873 – 16,644
2024 Jan. 4,841 4,209 – 569 1,400 – 2,865 6,243 4,372 – 3,740
Feb. 12,862 7,348 1,102 1,691 – 522 5,078 – 2,312 7,827
Mar. 17,943 13,538 1,459 – 498 8,865 3,713 3,784 620
Apr. – 9,914 – 10,653 2,897 – 1,562 – 14,334 2,346 4,972 – 4,233
May 5,787 2,720 – 2,643 77 2,782 2,505 3,598 – 532
June 15,859 9,951 – 486 – 207 9,726 918 2,329 3,578
July 323 – 18,134 – 1,491 480 – 19,593 2,471 – 4,491 22,947
* For definitions, see the explanatory notes in Statistical Series - Securities Issues
Statistics on pages 43 f.  1 Excluding registered bank debt securities.  2 Including
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Sectoral reclassification of
debt securities.  4 Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue.  5 Gross sales lessredemptions.  6 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year
2020 have been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions
are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
52•
VIII. Capital market
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities
End of year
or month/
Maturity
in years Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by
special-purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)Public
debt securities
2012 3,285,422 1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
1 2016 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
1 2017 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 651,211 320,432 2 302,543 1,617,244
2018 3,091,303 1,194,160 161,088 51,439 670,062 1 311,572 1 2 313,527 1,583,616
2019 2 3,149,373 1,222,911 174,188 47,712 696,325 304,686 2 342,325 1,584,136
4 2020 2 3,545,200 2 1,174,817 183,980 55,959 687,710 2 247,169 2 379,342 1,991,040
2021 3,781,975 1,250,777 202,385 63,496 731,068 253,828 414,791 2,116,406
2022 3,930,390 1,302,028 225,854 54,199 761,047 260,928 441,234 2,187,127
2023 4,131,592 1,384,958 237,099 54,312 806,808 286,739 441,742 2,304,892
2023 Aug. 4,095,643 1,365,614 234,566 53,961 795,808 281,279 444,711 2,285,319
Sep. 4,117,795 1,365,365 234,599 53,128 796,782 280,856 453,037 2,299,393
Oct. 4,110,219 1,362,975 231,537 52,084 794,730 284,623 450,654 2,296,591
Nov. 4,139,444 1,373,679 236,596 53,034 798,461 285,588 446,199 2,319,566
Dec. 4,131,592 1,384,958 237,099 54,312 806,808 286,739 441,742 2,304,892
2024 Jan. 4,140,092 1,394,649 236,671 55,735 808,508 293,736 446,559 2,298,884
Feb. 4,152,812 1,401,409 237,658 57,450 807,692 298,609 444,310 2,307,093
Mar. 4,173,121 1,415,363 239,096 56,960 816,963 302,344 448,012 2,309,746
Apr. 4,169,790 1,408,556 242,090 55,474 805,788 305,203 453,941 2,307,292
May 4,175,267 1,409,122 239,361 55,574 807,179 307,007 457,302 2,308,844
June 4,198,060 1,423,493 239,081 55,370 820,249 308,793 460,082 2,314,485
July 4,192,931 1,403,319 237,606 55,897 798,523 311,293 455,405 2,334,207
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity 3 Position at end-July 2024
up to under 2 1 196 543   495 197   67 512   15 919   297 435   114 330   90 299   611 047 
2 to under 4  826 336   354 531   70 738   16 917   189 998   76 878   84 481   387 325 
4 to under 6  621 058   220 167   45 007   8 992   126 554   39 614   71 144   329 746 
6 to under 8  412 531   137 951   21 325   3 946   83 450   29 230   40 818   233 762 
8 to under 10  341 310   92 757   22 879   6 563   47 258   16 057   28 850   219 702 
10 to under 15  250 171   57 274   7 297   3 199   37 284   9 495   27 954   164 943 
15 to under 20  127 108   12 147   2 040    232   7 616   2 259   17 380   97 581 
20 and above  417 874   33 294    808    128   8 927   23 431   94 479   290 100 
* Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers' portfolios.  1 Sectoral
reclassification of debt securities.  2 Adjustments due to the change in the country of
residence of the issuers or debt securities.  3 Calculated from month under review until
final maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of theresidual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc.
4 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year 2020 have
been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions are not
specially marked.
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies' capital due to
PeriodShare capital =
circulation at
end of period
under reviewNet increase or
net decrease (-)
during period
under reviewcash payments
and ex-
change of
convertible
bonds  1issue of
bonus sharescontribution
of claims
and other
real assetsmerger
and
transfer
of assetschange of
legal formreduction
of capital 
and
liquidationMemo item:
Share circulation
at market values
(market capita-
lisation)
level at end
of period
under review  2
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 – 478 594 – 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 – 6,879 2,971 718 476 – 1,432 – 619 – 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 – 465 – 1,044 – 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 – 1,394 – 1,385 – 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 – 1,062 3,272 319 337 – 953 – 2,165 – 1,865 1,676,397
2017 178,828 2,471 3,894 776 533 – 457 – 661 – 1,615 1,933,733
2018 180,187 1,357 3,670 716 82 – 1,055 – 1,111 – 946 1,634,155
3 4 2019 183,461 1,673 2,411 2,419 542 – 858 – 65 – 2,775 1,950,224
4 2020 181,881 – 2,872 1,877 219 178 – 2,051 – 460 – 2,635 1,963,588
2021 186,580 4,152 9,561 672 35 – 326 – 212 – 5,578 2,301,942
2022 199,789 12,272 14,950 224 371 – 29 – 293 – 2,952 1,858,963
2023 182,246 – 15,984 3,377 3 50 – 564 – 2,515 – 16,335 2,051,675
2023 Aug. 198,654 210 452 – –– 1 – 24 – 217 2,038,560
Sep. 198,328 – 325 280 3 –– 201 – 10 – 397 1,966,858
Oct. 198,522 194 504 – –– 100 – 2 – 208 1,852,180
Nov. 198,456 – 67 62 0 0 0 0 – 129 2,002,568
Dec. 182,246 – 16,210 677 0 0 0 – 2,366 – 14,521 2,051,675
2024 Jan. 182,103 – 144 42 0 0 – 0 – 115 – 71 2,061,708
Feb. 181,987 – 117 48 0 0 – 2 – 25 – 138 2,126,888
Mar. 182,100 113 344 0 0 – 7 – 5 – 218 2,213,065
Apr. 181,805 – 295 126 0 0 – 4 – 4 – 414 2,159,884
May 181,553 – 322 187 – – –– 328 – 180 2,159,986
June 181,236 – 317 31 8 0 – 9 – 73 – 274 2,135,158
July 181,104 – 143 117 20 0 – 5 – 11 – 263 2,131,696
* Excluding shares of public limited investment companies.  1 Including shares issued
out of company profits.  2 All marketplaces. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on
data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mit teilungen and Deutsche BörseAG. 3 Methodological changes since October 2019.  4 Changes due to statistical
adjustments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
53•
VIII. Capital market
5. Yields on German securities
Issue yields Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1
Public debt securities Public debt securities Bank debt securities
Listed Federal securities
Total Totalof which:
Listed Federal
debt securitiesBank debt 
securities Total Total TotalWith a residual
maturity of
 9 to
10 years  2 TotalWith a residual
maturity of more
than 9 years and
up to 10 yearsCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)
Period % per annum
2012 1.6 1.3 1.2 1.8 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7
2013 1.6 1.3 1.2 1.8 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4
2014 1.2 1.1 0.9 1.3 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0
2015 0.7 0.4 0.4 0.7 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4
2016 0.4 0.1 – 0.1 0.6 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1
2017 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.6 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7
2018 0.7 0.6 0.4 0.6 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 1.0 2.5
2019 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.3 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 0.1 0.3 2.5
2020 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.5 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.0 0.1 1.7
2021 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.3 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.1 0.2 0.9
2022 1.6 1.3 1.2 1.9 1.5 1.2 1.1 1.1 1.9 1.9 3.3
2023 2.9 2.6 2.5 3.4 2.9 2.6 2.5 2.4 3.3 3.2 4.2
2023 Aug. 2.92 2.58 2.58 3.42 3.01 2.71 2.60 2.55 3.44 3.31 4.27
Sep. 3.18 2.75 2.75 3.57 3.11 2.82 2.71 2.66 3.51 3.42 4.39
Oct. 3.18 2.86 2.86 3.66 3.25 2.96 2.84 2.82 3.66 3.63 4.56
Nov. 3.01 2.61 2.61 3.53 3.02 2.75 2.64 2.60 3.40 3.37 4.23
Dec. 3.01 2.44 2.44 3.67 2.52 2.26 2.15 2.10 2.91 2.92 3.63
2024 Jan. 2.81 2.44 2.44 2.87 2.57 2.32 2.22 2.17 2.94 2.97 3.67
Feb. 2.71 2.47 2.47 3.05 2.72 2.48 2.39 2.33 3.09 3.10 3.74
Mar. 2.94 2.56 2.56 3.10 2.73 2.49 2.41 2.35 3.07 3.02 3.73
Apr. 3.05 2.61 2.61 3.12 2.81 2.58 2.50 2.45 3.15 3.14 3.74
May 3.08 2.70 2.70 3.18 2.88 2.66 2.58 2.52 3.19 3.20 3.84
June 2.92 2.64 2.64 3.31 2.86 2.63 2.55 2.48 3.17 3.26 3.87
July 2.88 2.55 2.55 3.08 2.80 2.58 2.50 2.46 3.09 3.24 3.74
1 Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of
over 4 years. Structured debt securities, debt securities with unscheduled redemption,
zero coupon bonds, floating rate notes and bonds not denominated in Euro are not
included. Group yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the
amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figuresare calculated on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual
figures are the unweighted means of the monthly figures. Adjustment of the scope of
securities included on 1 May 2020.  2 Only debt securities eligible as underlying
instruments for futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages.
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds  1 (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the
general publicCredit institutions
including building
and loan associations  2 Other sectors  3
of which:
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases Total TotalMoney
market
fundsSecur-
ities-
based
fundsReal
estate
fundsSpecial-
ised
fundsForeign
funds  4 Total Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
shares Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
sharesNon-resi-
dents  5
2012 111,236 89,942 2,084 –1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 –3,062 –1,562 117,738 22,855 –3,437
2013 123,736 91,337 9,184 – 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,710
2014 137,294 97,711 3,998 – 473 862 1,000 93,713 39,583 141,134 819 –1,745 140,315 41,328 –3,841
2015 189,802 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 43,665 181,932 7,362 494 174,570 43,171 7,870
2016 149,288 119,369 21,301 – 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 29,919 156,236 2,877 –3,172 153,359 33,091 –6,948
2017 148,214 94,921 29,560 – 235 21,970 4,406 65,361 53,292 150,740 4,938 1,048 145,802 52,244 –2,526
2018 108,293 103,694 15,279 377 4,166 6,168 88,415 4,599 114,973 2,979 –2,306 111,994 6,905 –6,680
2019 171,666 122,546 17,032 – 447 5,097 10,580 105,514 49,120 176,210 2,719 – 812 173,491 49,932 –4,544
2020 157,349 116,028 19,193 – 42 11,343 8,795 96,835 41,321 156,421 336 –1,656 156,085 42,977 928
2021 280,746 157,861 41,016 482 31,023 7,841 116,845 122,885 289,169 13,154 254 276,015 122,631 –8,423
2022 108,741 79,022 6,057 482 444 5,071 72,991 29,718 111,948 3,170 –1,459 108,778 31,177 –3,207
2023 67,941 44,484 5,969 460 4,951 723 38,461 23,457 69,924 –4,778 –2,054 74,702 25,511 –1,984
2023 Aug. 4,460 4,731 13 115 – 107 – 40 4,720 – 271 4,311 132 – 129 4,179 – 142 149
Sep. 4,757 2,115 702 61 785 – 115 1,411 2,641 5,562 362 106 5,200 2,535 – 805
Oct. –2,603 –2,394 –1,269 – 130 – 843 – 139 –1,186 – 209 –2,712 814 – 113 –3,526 – 96 108
Nov. 219 –3,273 592 93 807 – 276 –3,865 3,493 1,322 95 – 288 1,227 3,781 –1,102
Dec. 10,428 10,971 –1,536 156 –1,448 – 182 12,506 – 543 9,666 – 11 13 9,677 – 556 762
2024 Jan. 23,814 10,382 – 457 141 – 406 – 19 10,839 13,431 24,111 1,999 196 22,112 13,235 – 298
Feb. 1,751 –1,458 –1,095 23 – 688 – 430 – 363 3,209 2,272 60 162 2,212 3,047 – 521
Mar. 2,573 –2,329 –1,070 188 – 610 – 455 –1,259 4,902 2,221 358 – 426 1,863 5,328 352
Apr. 15,151 10,159 742 220 1,063 – 481 9,417 4,992 14,331 442 226 13,889 4,766 821
May 8,797 378 210 137 479 – 463 172 8,419 9,214 233 – 46 8,981 8,465 – 416
June 10,169 1,653 461 161 493 – 241 1,190 8,516 9,640 74 – 31 9,566 8,547 529
July 11,848 1,969 225 285 566 – 729 1,744 9,879 11,283 149 47 11,134 9,832 565
1 Including public limited investment companies.  2 Book values.  3 Residual.  4 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values.  5 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of domestic fund shares by non-residents; transaction values.— The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
54•
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2022 2023 2024
 Item 2021 2022 2023 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 45.36 67.77 –0.75 23.78 –22.94 –12.62 24.29 10.52 –15.53
   Debt securities 2.81 4.10 6.70 0.05 4.49 1.79 1.67 –1.25 5.80
     Short-term debt securities 2.29 1.23 1.62 –0.22 2.00 1.06 –0.15 –1.29 2.51
     Long-term debt securities 0.52 2.87 5.08 0.26 2.49 0.73 1.82 0.04 3.29
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 1.31 3.40 6.68 0.43 3.81 2.76 0.42 –0.32 3.02
         Non-financial corporations 0.72 0.86 –0.03 0.13 0.76 –0.34 –0.48 0.03 0.65
         Financial corporations 1.08 1.79 3.19 –0.04 1.43 1.43 0.28 0.06 0.92
         General government –0.48 0.74 3.51 0.34 1.63 1.66 0.62 –0.40 1.45
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 1.50 0.70 0.02 –0.38 0.68 –0.98 1.25 –0.93 2.77
   Loans 67.49 46.20 84.87 –11.70 32.33 7.60 18.91 26.03 38.21
     Short-term loans 47.34 24.94 69.68 –18.66 23.26 8.20 16.65 21.57 28.20
     Long-term loans 20.15 21.26 15.19 6.95 9.07 –0.60 2.26 4.46 10.02
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 10.10 27.15 81.44 –3.46 37.72 7.91 17.45 18.36 30.78
         Non-financial corporations 7.11 23.94 71.35 7.51 29.88 7.51 14.72 19.24 17.94
         Financial corporations 3.33 1.46 11.89 –9.63 7.34 2.27 3.04 –0.75 9.12
         General government –0.34 1.75 –1.81 –1.35 0.50 –1.87 –0.30 –0.13 3.71
       Loans to the rest of the world 57.40 19.05 3.43 –8.24 –5.38 –0.31 1.45 7.67 7.44
   Equity and investment fund shares 145.48 104.11 37.76 24.34 –12.63 28.67 8.53 13.18 31.63
     Equity 123.72 104.06 34.30 22.35 –13.35 26.34 7.21 14.10 25.82
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 15.33 44.06 –14.32 –3.71 –10.51 –0.27 4.72 –8.26 3.45
         Non-financial corporations 16.89 43.79 –13.91 –3.82 –10.45 –0.32 5.06 –8.21 2.43
         Financial corporations –1.56 0.27 –0.41 0.11 –0.07 0.05 –0.34 –0.05 1.02
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 8.32 2.56 –25.42 2.99 –20.50 0.31 –9.40 4.17 2.88
       Other equity  1 100.07 57.44 74.03 23.07 17.66 26.30 11.88 18.19 19.49
     Investment fund shares 21.77 0.05 3.46 1.99 0.72 2.33 1.33 –0.92 5.80
       Money market fund shares 0.66 –0.38 –0.58 2.37 –0.80 –0.41 0.59 0.04 –0.53
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 21.11 0.43 4.04 –0.38 1.52 2.74 0.74 –0.95 6.33
   Insurance technical reserves 19.52 1.60 4.81 –1.17 6.55 0.02 –0.09 –1.67 12.32
   Financial derivatives 15.54 28.93 –1.07 –30.76 3.95 0.70 14.01 –19.73 4.26
   Other accounts receivable 64.45 18.33 79.55 130.88 88.87 –9.40 –52.95 53.04 76.18
   Total 360.65 271.05 211.86 135.43 100.63 16.75 14.36 80.11 152.87
 External financing
   Debt securities 20.86 14.16 0.35 –1.93 1.38 2.44 1.57 –5.04 6.82
     Short-term securities 2.51 –0.36 –4.68 –2.69 –0.16 –0.70 –0.84 –2.99 1.01
       Long-term securities 18.35 14.52 5.03 0.76 1.54 3.14 2.41 –2.05 5.80
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 9.11 5.85 0.60 –1.61 1.62 0.50 0.56 –2.08 2.04
           Non-financial corporations 0.72 0.86 –0.03 0.13 0.76 –0.34 –0.48 0.03 0.65
           Financial corporations 9.09 4.46 –2.89 –1.99 0.29 –0.28 –0.08 –2.82 1.02
           General government 0.09 –0.07 –0.11 0.01 0.00 –0.07 –0.04 –0.00 0.01
           Households –0.79 0.60 3.62 0.24 0.57 1.18 1.16 0.71 0.36
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 11.75 8.31 –0.25 –0.32 –0.25 1.94 1.02 –2.96 4.78
   Loans 138.35 176.99 46.79 28.41 15.49 21.40 5.48 4.43 24.82
     Short-term loans 77.99 73.18 22.58 –16.64 7.16 13.36 2.82 –0.75 18.82
     Long-term loans 60.36 103.82 24.21 45.05 8.33 8.04 2.66 5.18 6.00
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 76.20 155.70 81.00 15.04 50.10 16.67 10.98 3.25 31.77
         Non-financial corporations 7.11 23.94 71.35 7.51 29.88 7.51 14.72 19.24 17.94
         Financial corporations 55.94 110.61 30.27 17.77 27.60 13.60 1.32 –12.24 18.99
         General government 13.16 21.15 –20.63 –10.25 –7.38 –4.44 –5.06 –3.75 –5.16
       Loans from the rest of the world 62.15 21.29 –34.21 13.38 –34.61 4.72 –5.50 1.18 –6.95
   Equity 61.44 16.99 2.98 1.42 –4.77 7.18 1.91 –1.33 15.77
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 26.44 57.01 –27.67 0.59 –13.76 –5.08 1.80 –10.64 –7.77
       Non-financial corporations 16.89 43.79 –13.91 –3.82 –10.45 –0.32 5.06 –8.21 2.43
       Financial corporations –2.39 2.17 –8.32 2.89 –0.69 –4.56 –1.88 –1.19 –9.73
       General government –0.09 0.76 –1.12 0.10 –0.88 –0.21 –0.04 0.01 0.05
       Households 12.04 10.29 –4.32 1.42 –1.75 0.01 –1.33 –1.24 –0.53
     Listed shares of the rest of the world 18.88 –9.46 13.66 –2.61 2.00 7.38 1.84 2.45 10.75
     Other equity  1 16.11 –30.55 16.99 3.43 6.98 4.88 –1.73 6.86 12.80
   Insurance technical reserves 4.26 3.53 3.53 0.89 0.88 0.88 0.88 0.89 0.88
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 14.32 –14.10 10.22 –13.34 1.58 2.08 2.72 3.85 0.62
   Other accounts payable 139.60 64.69 59.45 20.47 10.76 3.01 3.48 42.20 –1.52
   Total 378.83 262.27 123.33 35.91 25.31 36.98 16.04 44.99 47.38
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
55•
IX. Financial accounts
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2022 2023 2024
 Item 2021 2022 2023 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 726.6 794.5 710.5 794.5 746.4 654.8 732.5 710.5 638.3
   Debt securities 54.3 53.8 62.1 53.8 58.9 60.5 62.1 62.1 68.2
     Short-term debt securities 7.1 8.4 9.8 8.4 10.4 11.2 11.1 9.8 12.7
     Long-term debt securities 47.2 45.5 52.3 45.5 48.5 49.3 51.1 52.3 55.5
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 23.3 24.7 32.2 24.7 28.7 31.4 31.9 32.2 35.4
         Non-financial corporations 5.3 5.8 5.8 5.8 6.5 6.2 5.7 5.8 6.5
         Financial corporations 14.5 15.0 18.8 15.0 16.6 18.0 18.3 18.8 19.9
         General government 3.5 3.9 7.6 3.9 5.6 7.2 7.8 7.6 9.0
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 31.0 29.2 29.9 29.2 30.2 29.1 30.3 29.9 32.7
   Loans 803.0 852.9 935.7 852.9 884.0 891.0 911.2 935.7 975.2
     Short-term loans 612.9 640.1 708.2 640.1 662.4 669.9 687.5 708.2 736.9
     Long-term loans 190.1 212.7 227.5 212.7 221.6 221.1 223.7 227.5 238.3
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 439.8 467.0 548.4 467.0 504.7 512.6 530.1 548.4 579.2
         Non-financial corporations 334.7 358.7 430.0 358.7 388.5 396.0 410.8 430.0 447.9
         Financial corporations 82.8 84.2 96.1 84.2 91.6 93.8 96.9 96.1 105.2
         General government 22.4 24.1 22.3 24.1 24.6 22.7 22.4 22.3 26.0
       Loans to the rest of the world 363.2 385.9 387.3 385.9 379.3 378.3 381.1 387.3 396.0
   Equity and investment fund shares 2,852.2 2,607.8 2,693.3 2,607.8 2,681.7 2,705.4 2,657.2 2,693.3 2,780.1
     Equity 2,612.0 2,395.2 2,457.7 2,395.2 2,463.0 2,480.0 2,431.2 2,457.7 2,531.0
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 393.0 331.8 334.5 331.8 361.1 354.8 330.1 334.5 359.7
         Non-financial corporations 384.9 324.5 326.7 324.5 353.9 347.0 322.9 326.7 351.0
         Financial corporations 8.0 7.4 7.8 7.4 7.2 7.8 7.2 7.8 8.6
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 74.7 69.8 48.0 69.8 51.6 51.4 41.5 48.0 51.4
       Other equity  1 2,144.3 1,993.6 2,075.2 1,993.6 2,050.4 2,073.8 2,059.5 2,075.2 2,120.0
     Investment fund shares 240.2 212.6 235.6 212.6 218.6 225.4 226.0 235.6 249.1
       Money market fund shares 7.6 7.2 6.9 7.2 6.5 6.1 6.8 6.9 6.4
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 232.6 205.4 228.7 205.4 212.1 219.3 219.3 228.7 242.7
   Insurance technical reserves 64.8 41.1 44.6 41.1 47.3 46.6 45.8 44.6 55.0
   Financial derivatives 105.9 92.2 33.4 92.2 65.1 56.9 44.7 33.4 35.0
   Other accounts receivable 1,454.4 1,518.1 1,629.7 1,518.1 1,572.4 1,568.3 1,597.2 1,629.7 1,674.8
   Total 6,061.2 5,960.5 6,109.3 5,960.5 6,055.7 5,983.4 6,050.8 6,109.3 6,226.6
 Liabilities
   Debt securities 252.3 228.7 239.7 228.7 231.2 234.8 234.8 239.7 247.0
     Short-term securities 9.6 9.3 4.5 9.3 9.1 8.4 7.5 4.5 5.6
     Long-term securities 242.7 219.4 235.2 219.4 222.1 226.4 227.3 235.2 241.4
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 100.6 91.0 96.4 91.0 93.5 94.2 94.2 96.4 102.3
         Non-financial corporations 5.3 5.8 5.8 5.8 6.5 6.2 5.7 5.8 6.5
         Financial corporations 83.2 73.5 74.8 73.5 74.4 74.4 73.9 74.8 79.3
         General government 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3
         Households 11.8 11.4 15.5 11.4 12.2 13.3 14.4 15.5 16.2
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 151.7 137.7 143.3 137.7 137.7 140.6 140.7 143.3 144.7
   Loans 2,429.1 2,613.8 2,654.5 2,613.8 2,626.0 2,646.5 2,653.8 2,654.5 2,681.0
     Short-term loans 904.0 981.3 999.7 981.3 986.5 999.5 1,003.8 999.7 1,017.8
     Long-term loans 1,525.1 1,632.5 1,654.8 1,632.5 1,639.5 1,646.9 1,649.9 1,654.8 1,663.2
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 1,483.9 1,640.0 1,718.9 1,640.0 1,689.1 1,705.3 1,715.8 1,718.9 1,751.8
         Non-financial corporations 334.7 358.7 430.0 358.7 388.5 396.0 410.8 430.0 447.9
         Financial corporations 1,034.5 1,145.7 1,174.0 1,145.7 1,172.1 1,185.3 1,186.6 1,174.0 1,193.2
         General government 114.7 135.7 115.0 135.7 128.5 123.9 118.4 115.0 110.6
       Loans from the rest of the world 945.1 973.8 935.5 973.8 936.9 941.1 938.0 935.5 929.2
   Equity 3,689.0 2,983.3 3,216.9 2,983.3 3,267.6 3,266.2 3,114.0 3,216.9 3,384.0
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 924.8 761.4 807.6 761.4 855.9 821.5 778.6 807.6 851.9
       Non-financial corporations 384.9 324.5 326.7 324.5 353.9 347.0 322.9 326.7 351.0
       Financial corporations 210.3 151.2 173.2 151.2 182.3 165.2 167.9 173.2 173.5
       General government 69.9 69.2 76.0 69.2 78.9 75.3 70.9 76.0 83.0
       Households 259.7 216.4 231.7 216.4 240.9 234.0 216.8 231.7 244.3
     Listed shares of the rest of the world 1,126.3 823.1 951.1 823.1 941.1 976.2 910.3 951.1 1,029.2
     Other equity  1 1,637.9 1,398.8 1,458.2 1,398.8 1,470.6 1,468.5 1,425.1 1,458.2 1,502.9
   Insurance technical reserves 287.4 290.9 294.5 290.9 291.8 292.7 293.6 294.5 295.3
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 137.4 73.3 30.5 73.3 44.7 39.5 15.0 30.5 28.1
   Other accounts payable 1,526.5 1,601.6 1,677.0 1,601.6 1,596.7 1,610.6 1,674.1 1,677.0 1,656.3
   Total 8,321.7 7,791.5 8,113.0 7,791.5 8,058.1 8,090.3 7,985.3 8,113.0 8,291.7
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
56•
IX. Financial accounts
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2022 2023 2024
 Item 2021 2022 2023 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 145.09 110.33 90.46 41.11 –10.65 25.45 13.52 62.14 33.12
     Currency 59.48 44.15 14.18 6.15 2.94 3.37 2.53 5.34 0.95
     Deposits 85.61 66.18 76.28 34.96 –13.59 22.08 11.00 56.80 32.17
       Transferable deposits 90.84 47.63 –129.98 4.41 –60.51 –18.16 –32.67 –18.65 –33.47
       Time deposits –5.09 34.49 184.51 33.49 50.43 43.22 42.53 48.32 61.89
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) –0.13 –15.94 21.75 –2.95 –3.52 –2.99 1.14 27.12 3.75
   Debt securities –5.89 25.03 65.16 11.96 29.74 20.44 14.29 0.69 8.76
     Short-term debt securities 0.31 2.01 11.75 1.79 7.99 5.68 2.12 –4.04 –1.03
     Long-term debt securities –6.20 23.02 53.40 10.17 21.74 14.76 12.17 4.73 9.79
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors –3.70 20.31 53.95 10.52 25.57 16.76 11.99 –0.36 6.58
         Non-financial corporations –0.83 0.50 3.41 0.23 0.52 1.11 1.09 0.68 0.32
         Financial corporations –2.57 17.47 42.65 9.01 21.52 12.75 9.33 –0.94 6.31
         General government –0.30 2.35 7.88 1.29 3.52 2.90 1.57 –0.10 –0.05
       Debt securities of the rest of the world –2.19 4.72 11.21 1.44 4.17 3.69 2.30 1.05 2.18
   Equity and investment fund shares 136.69 78.09 36.31 15.59 12.05 9.93 8.70 5.63 15.39
     Equity 31.80 26.89 0.25 4.97 0.11 0.36 0.80 –1.02 1.72
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 14.29 12.38 –4.63 0.70 –0.91 0.02 –1.43 –2.31 –1.13
         Non-financial corporations 12.71 9.96 –3.59 1.36 –2.03 0.10 –0.41 –1.25 –0.52
         Financial corporations 1.58 2.42 –1.04 –0.66 1.12 –0.08 –1.02 –1.07 –0.62
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 10.83 8.55 2.89 3.04 0.44 –0.21 1.73 0.92 2.09
       Other equity  1 6.69 5.96 1.99 1.23 0.57 0.56 0.50 0.37 0.77
     Investment fund shares 104.88 51.19 36.07 10.62 11.94 9.57 7.91 6.65 13.67
       Money market fund shares 0.19 0.82 4.39 0.44 0.43 1.47 1.67 0.82 1.48
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 104.70 50.37 31.68 10.18 11.50 8.10 6.24 5.83 12.20
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 20.31 –0.39 1.15 –1.69 5.43 –0.96 –1.07 –2.26 10.98
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 51.74 31.33 –11.47 7.29 0.85 0.55 –2.15 –10.71 0.14
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 27.32 48.64 41.98 11.96 14.04 5.55 11.97 10.42 3.78
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts receivable  2 0.76 0.04 33.14 –19.50 20.65 –0.31 13.68 –0.87 14.75
   Total 376.00 293.06 256.73 66.72 72.10 60.66 58.94 65.03 86.91
 External financing
   Loans 98.17 83.71 14.40 9.52 2.49 5.68 6.31 –0.07 0.25
     Short-term loans 0.86 2.59 –0.90 0.10 0.74 –0.28 –0.50 –0.86 –0.80
     Long-term loans 97.31 81.12 15.30 9.42 1.75 5.96 6.80 0.79 1.05
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 99.89 79.73 18.85 10.55 2.73 5.91 6.43 3.79 1.78
       Consumer loans –0.89 4.60 1.44 0.87 0.54 1.26 1.66 –2.02 –0.41
       Entrepreneurial loans –0.83 –0.61 –5.89 –1.90 –0.78 –1.49 –1.78 –1.84 –1.13
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 94.32 82.56 12.26 9.45 1.80 4.69 6.41 –0.64 –0.24
       Loans from financial corporations other than MFIs 3.85 1.15 2.14 0.07 0.68 0.99 –0.10 0.57 0.49
       Loans from general government and rest of the world –0.00 –0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts payable 0.90 3.08 2.09 2.03 –0.57 –0.33 0.51 2.47 1.52
   Total 99.07 86.79 16.49 11.55 1.92 5.35 6.82 2.41 1.76
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
57•
IX. Financial accounts
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2022 2023 2024
 Item 2021 2022 2023 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 3,007.3 3,119.7 3,219.2 3,119.7 3,107.9 3,133.4 3,148.7 3,219.2 3,254.0
     Currency 386.8 431.0 445.2 431.0 433.9 437.3 439.8 445.2 446.1
     Deposits 2,620.5 2,688.7 2,774.1 2,688.7 2,674.0 2,696.1 2,708.8 2,774.1 2,807.9
       Transferable deposits 1,764.4 1,811.7 1,686.3 1,811.7 1,756.0 1,737.7 1,705.0 1,686.3 1,652.9
       Time deposits 297.3 334.8 528.7 334.8 384.2 427.6 471.9 528.7 592.2
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) 558.8 542.3 559.1 542.3 533.8 530.8 531.9 559.1 562.8
     Debt securities 109.6 125.0 198.2 125.0 157.1 177.7 192.5 198.2 209.0
       Short-term debt securities 1.8 3.9 12.5 3.9 11.9 15.9 16.4 12.5 18.5
       Long-term debt securities 107.8 121.1 185.7 121.1 145.2 161.8 176.1 185.7 190.5
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 75.3 88.4 147.8 88.4 116.1 133.0 144.6 147.8 154.6
           Non-financial corporations 9.8 9.7 13.5 9.7 10.4 11.4 12.4 13.5 14.1
           Financial corporations 63.2 74.5 122.0 74.5 98.0 110.9 120.0 122.0 128.2
           General government 2.2 4.2 12.3 4.2 7.8 10.7 12.2 12.3 12.3
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 34.3 36.6 50.4 36.6 41.0 44.7 47.9 50.4 54.4
   Equity and investment fund shares 1,900.6 1,725.3 1,930.8 1,725.3 1,824.2 1,864.9 1,837.0 1,930.8 2,064.6
     Equity 967.8 869.3 968.1 869.3 931.1 943.0 921.8 968.1 1,027.4
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 296.0 255.9 279.2 255.9 282.1 277.0 262.5 279.2 299.5
         Non-financial corporations 250.4 208.7 223.9 208.7 232.3 225.6 209.5 223.9 236.4
         Financial corporations 45.6 47.2 55.3 47.2 49.9 51.3 53.0 55.3 63.1
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 249.2 209.3 247.9 209.3 227.3 239.5 235.7 247.9 270.1
       Other equity  1 422.6 404.1 441.0 404.1 421.7 426.6 423.6 441.0 457.8
     Investment fund shares 932.7 856.0 962.6 856.0 893.1 921.9 915.2 962.6 1,037.2
       Money market fund shares 2.5 3.3 7.8 3.3 3.7 5.2 7.0 7.8 9.3
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 930.2 852.7 954.8 852.7 889.4 916.7 908.2 954.8 1,027.9
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 432.5 41.4 43.7 41.4 47.2 46.1 45.0 43.7 53.6
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 1,162.2 1,087.1 1,141.3 1,087.1 1,108.4 1,111.8 1,077.0 1,141.3 1,158.6
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 986.1 1,117.7 1,161.3 1,117.7 1,132.1 1,139.8 1,141.2 1,161.3 1,167.8
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts receivable  2 27.5 26.5 35.5 26.5 26.9 27.6 26.8 35.5 37.9
   Total 7,625.7 7,242.6 7,730.0 7,242.6 7,403.8 7,501.3 7,468.1 7,730.0 7,945.5
 Liabilities
   Loans 2,024.3 2,111.8 2,128.7 2,111.8 2,114.4 2,119.9 2,126.7 2,128.7 2,128.3
     Short-term loans 53.0 55.5 55.1 55.5 56.6 56.4 55.9 55.1 54.4
     Long-term loans 1,971.3 2,056.3 2,073.5 2,056.3 2,057.8 2,063.5 2,070.9 2,073.5 2,073.9
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 1,549.3 1,632.3 1,654.5 1,632.3 1,636.1 1,641.8 1,648.8 1,654.5 1,655.6
       Consumer loans 224.5 228.9 230.0 228.9 229.7 230.8 232.1 230.0 229.6
       Entrepreneurial loans 250.5 250.6 244.2 250.6 248.6 247.3 245.9 244.2 243.2
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,920.3 2,004.0 2,016.3 2,004.0 2,005.8 2,010.5 2,016.9 2,016.3 2,016.2
       Loans from financial corporations other than MFIs 104.0 107.8 112.4 107.8 108.6 109.4 109.9 112.4 112.2
       Loans from general government and rest of the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts payable 20.3 23.5 25.9 23.5 23.0 22.8 23.3 25.9 27.4
   Total 2,044.6 2,135.4 2,154.5 2,135.4 2,137.4 2,142.6 2,150.1 2,154.5 2,155.7
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
58•
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
General
governmentCentral
governmentState
governmentLocal
governmentSocial
security
fundsGeneral
governmentCentral
governmentState
governmentLocal
governmentSocial
security
funds
Period € billion As a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus 1
2017 +43.7 + 7.9 +13.9 +10.7 +11.1 +1.3 +0.2 +0.4 +0.3 +0.3
2018 +65.6 +21.0 +12.0 +16.7 +16.0 +1.9 +0.6 +0.4 +0.5 +0.5
2019 +53.0 +21.5 +14.0 +8.4 +9.1 +1.5 +0.6 +0.4 +0.2 +0.3
p 2020 –147.7 –87.1 –32.6 +6.9 –34.8 –4.3 –2.6 –1.0 +0.2 –1.0
p 2021 –129.7 –144.2 +5.6 +6.2 +2.6 –3.6 –4.0 +0.2 +0.2 +0.1
p 2022 –96.9 –124.3 +14.4 +4.7 +8.3 –2.5 –3.2 +0.4 +0.1 +0.2
pe 2023 –99.1 –90.5 –5.3 –12.1 +8.8 –2.4 –2.2 –0.1 –0.3 +0.2
p 2022 H1 – 4.6 –36.2 +18.2 +5.8 +7.7 –0.2 –1.9 +1.0 +0.3 +0.4
pH2 –92.3 –88.0 –3.8 –1.1 +0.6 –4.7 –4.4 –0.2 –0.1 +0.0
pe 2023 H1 –37.9 –43.3 –2.2 –2.9 +10.4 –1.9 –2.1 –0.1 –0.1 +0.5
peH2 –61.2 –47.2 –3.0 –9.2 –1.7 –2.9 –2.2 –0.1 –0.4 –0.1
Debt level 2 End of year or quarter
2017 2,130.3 1,361.5 616.8 168.3 0.8 65.2 41.7 18.9 5.2 0.0
2018 2,083.7 1,334.5 603.2 162.2 0.7 61.9 39.7 17.9 4.8 0.0
2019 2,069.9 1,312.3 612.7 161.4 0.9 59.6 37.8 17.6 4.6 0.0
p 2020 2,340.8 1,526.5 664.4 163.2 7.6 68.8 44.8 19.5 4.8 0.2
p 2021 2,495.5 1,679.3 665.3 165.3 0.6 69.0 46.4 18.4 4.6 0.0
p 2022 2,561.7 1,776.0 634.2 172.2 2.8 66.1 45.8 16.4 4.4 0.1
p 2023 2,622.7 1,850.1 623.1 177.7 2.6 63.6 44.9 15.1 4.3 0.1
p 2022 Q1 2,499.1 1,684.3 663.4 164.9 3.4 67.6 45.6 17.9 4.5 0.1
pQ2 2,537.4 1,723.4 660.2 166.8 3.7 67.4 45.8 17.5 4.4 0.1
pQ3 2,551.3 1,757.0 643.8 166.6 4.2 66.8 46.0 16.9 4.4 0.1
pQ4 2,561.7 1,776.0 634.2 172.2 2.8 66.1 45.8 16.4 4.4 0.1
p 2023 Q1 2,587.2 1,798.7 632.0 173.0 3.5 65.6 45.6 16.0 4.4 0.1
pQ2 2,586.5 1,806.1 624.2 172.8 2.7 64.6 45.1 15.6 4.3 0.1
pQ3 2,627.2 1,848.6 621.6 175.5 3.8 64.6 45.5 15.3 4.3 0.1
pQ4 2,622.7 1,850.1 623.1 177.7 2.6 63.6 44.9 15.1 4.3 0.1
p 2024 Q1 2,635.9 1,856.3 630.8 180.6 3.0 63.4 44.6 15.2 4.3 0.1
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations.  1 The deficit/surplus in
accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition.  2 Quarterly GDP
ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding quarters.
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts *
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Period Total TaxesSocial con-
tributions Other TotalSocial
benefitsCompen-
sation of
employeesInter-
mediate
consumptionGross
capital
formation Interest OtherDeficit/
surplusMemo item:
Total tax
burden  1
€ billion
2017 1,486.9 773.3 549.5 164.2 1,443.3 784.8 250.6 169.5 71.6 33.8 132.9 +43.7 1,329.5
2018 1,557.2 808.1 572.6 176.6 1,491.6 805.6 260.3 176.4 78.5 31.2 139.7 +65.6 1,387.7
2019 1,616.5 834.7 598.2 183.6 1,563.4 846.2 273.6 187.4 84.2 27.4 144.5 +53.0 1,440.0
p 2020 1,569.9 781.7 608.1 180.1 1,717.6 904.5 285.2 211.3 92.9 21.7 201.9 –147.7 1,396.7
p 2021 1,712.9 889.0 632.1 191.8 1,842.6 941.1 295.4 226.6 92.5 21.1 266.0 –129.7 1,528.7
p 2022 1,821.2 955.9 666.8 198.6 1,918.1 974.0 307.9 238.4 100.9 26.5 270.4 –96.9 1,633.4
pe 2023 1,908.0 967.8 709.4 230.8 2,007.1 1,022.8 328.0 259.0 106.7 36.2 254.4 –99.1 1,685.6
As a percentage of GDP
2017 45.5 23.7 16.8 5.0 44.2 24.0 7.7 5.2 2.2 1.0 4.1 +1.3 40.7
2018 46.3 24.0 17.0 5.2 44.3 23.9 7.7 5.2 2.3 0.9 4.1 +1.9 41.2
2019 46.5 24.0 17.2 5.3 45.0 24.4 7.9 5.4 2.4 0.8 4.2 +1.5 41.4
p 2020 46.1 23.0 17.9 5.3 50.5 26.6 8.4 6.2 2.7 0.6 5.9 –4.3 41.0
p 2021 47.3 24.6 17.5 5.3 50.9 26.0 8.2 6.3 2.6 0.6 7.4 –3.6 42.3
p 2022 47.0 24.7 17.2 5.1 49.5 25.1 7.9 6.1 2.6 0.7 7.0 –2.5 42.1
pe 2023 46.3 23.5 17.2 5.6 48.7 24.8 8.0 6.3 2.6 0.9 6.2 –2.4 40.9
Percentage growth rates
2017 +4.2 +4.6 +4.8 +0.5 +3.8 +4.0 +4.1 +4.3 +5.1 –9.3 +4.5 . +4.7
2018 +4.7 +4.5 +4.2 +7.6 +3.3 +2.6 +3.9 +4.1 +9.7 –7.8 +5.1 . +4.4
2019 +3.8 +3.3 +4.5 +4.0 +4.8 +5.1 +5.1 +6.2 +7.2 –12.0 +3.5 . +3.8
p 2020 –2.9 –6.3 +1.6 –1.9 +9.9 +6.9 +4.2 +12.7 +10.4 –20.8 +39.7 . –3.0
p 2021 +9.1 +13.7 +3.9 +6.5 +7.3 +4.1 +3.6 +7.2 –0.5 –3.1 +31.7 . +9.4
p 2022 +6.3 +7.5 +5.5 +3.6 +4.1 +3.5 +4.3 +5.2 +9.0 +25.8 +1.7 . +6.9
pe 2023 +4.8 +1.2 +6.4 +16.2 +4.6 +5.0 +6.5 +8.7 +5.7 +36.6 –5.9 . +3.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office.  * Figures in accordance with ESA 2010.  1 Taxes and
social contributions plus customs duties and bank levies to the Single Resolution Fund.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
59•
X. Public finances in Germany
3. General government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:  3
Period Total  4 TaxesFinan-
cial
transac-
tions  5 Total  4Person-
nel
expend-
itureCurrent
grants InterestFixed
asset
forma-
tionFinan-
cial
transac-
tions  5Deficit/
surplusRev-
enue  6Expend-
itureDeficit/
surplusRev-
enueExpend-
itureDeficit/
surplus
2017 897.6 734.5 7.7 867.8 261.5 327.2 41.9 51.7 13.8 +29.8 631.5 622.0 +9.5 1,414.9 1,375.6 +39.3
2018 949.2 776.3 6.0 904.0 272.4 337.3 39.1 55.1 16.1 +45.2 656.2 642.5 +13.6 1,488.1 1,429.3 +58.8
2019 1,007.7 799.4 11.0 973.9 285.9 348.9 33.5 62.2 16.8 +33.7 685.0 676.7 +8.3 1,571.2 1,529.2 +42.0
2020 944.3 739.9 13.7 1,109.7 299.4 422.0 25.8 68.6 59.9 –165.4 719.5 747.8 –28.3 1,516.2 1,709.9 –193.7
2021 1,105.4 833.3 25.3 1,239.9 310.7 530.8 21.0 69.3 26.1 –134.5 769.2 777.1 –7.9 1,701.6 1,844.0 –142.4
2022 1,145.2 895.9 32.4 1,287.0 325.7 499.6 33.5 72.5 79.3 –141.8 800.5 793.3 +7.2 1,772.9 1,907.5 –134.6
P 2023 1,224.6 915.9 36.4 1,320.3 349.7 479.8 64.4 83.5 31.9 –95.7 820.3 814.5 +5.9 1,904.7 1,994.5 –89.8
2021 Q1 240.7 185.3 4.3 300.6 75.5 130.8 7.3 11.1 14.6 –59.9 P182.4 P196.3 P–13.9 P385.2 P458.9 P–73.8
Q2 267.0 195.8 7.5 297.1 74.8 122.7 10.7 15.2 10.5 –30.2 P185.9 P197.0 P–11.1 P414.1 P455.3 P–41.2
Q3 270.9 210.7 7.4 290.2 75.8 116.3 – 0.4 16.5 10.4 –19.3 P183.4 P191.9 P–8.6 P413.5 P441.4 P–27.8
Q4 332.9 237.7 6.1 347.8 84.1 153.4 3.1 26.4 – 9.4 –14.9 P197.3 P190.4 P+6.9 P492.6 P500.6 P–8.0
2022 Q1 278.2 224.0 5.0 279.3 79.6 116.8 5.5 11.9 7.0 – 1.0 P193.8 P199.8 P–6.0 P430.7 P437.8 P–7.1
Q2 287.9 224.6 5.1 294.2 77.8 126.4 10.6 15.3 5.9 – 6.2 P199.9 P196.7 P+3.2 P444.2 P447.2 P–3.1
Q3 267.7 207.0 13.3 298.8 78.1 116.8 10.8 17.7 10.8 –31.0 P194.0 P197.6 P–3.6 P419.2 P453.8 P–34.6
Q4 318.5 244.5 9.0 413.5 89.7 138.5 6.5 27.5 55.6 –95.0 P210.5 P198.1 P+12.4 P486.0 P568.5 P–82.5
2023 Q1 281.9 215.4 9.3 331.8 81.3 130.7 20.1 13.6 17.8 –49.9 P195.4 P200.8 P–5.4 P441.7 P497.0 P–55.3
Q2 311.6 226.3 9.4 313.1 84.7 117.7 24.2 17.8 2.2 – 1.6 P199.3 P198.9 P+0.4 P476.2 P477.3 P–1.1
Q3 290.5 229.6 7.2 303.1 86.5 103.2 12.6 21.0 4.5 –12.6 P201.5 P205.0 P–3.6 P457.1 P473.3 P–16.1
Q4 347.5 244.6 10.6 375.3 96.7 126.3 11.5 30.9 7.4 –27.7 P218.4 P208.7 P+9.7 P530.8 P548.9 P–18.1
2024 Q1 290.7 225.5 7.9 310.8 92.3 113.9 16.8 17.6 3.7 –20.1 P204.0 P212.1 P–8.1 P460.0 P488.2 P–28.2
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data.  1 Annual fig-
ures based on the quarterly figures of the Federal Statistical Office, core budgets and
off-budget entities which are assigned to the general government sector.  2 The annual
figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all pro-
visional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are estimated.  3 The develop-
ment of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in part by statisticalchangeovers.  4 Including discrepancies in clearing transactions between central, state
and local government.  5 On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as dis-
posals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this con-
tains the acquisition of equity interests and loans granted.  6 Excluding central govern-
ment liquidity assistance to the Federal Employment Agency.
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus
2017 357.8 352.8 + 5.0 396.7 385.5 +11.3 258.5 247.7 +10.7
2018 374.4 363.5 +10.9 419.6 399.8 +19.9 270.0 260.1 + 9.8
2019 382.5 369.2 +13.3 436.3 419.3 +17.0 282.4 276.7 + 5.7
2020 341.4 472.1 –130.7 455.5 489.0 –33.6 295.2 293.2 + 2.0
2021 370.3 511.9 –141.6 509.3 508.7 + 0.5 308.0 303.4 + 4.6
2022 399.6 515.6 –116.0 534.8 522.5 +12.3 328.5 325.8 + 2.7
2023 425.3 490.2 –64.9 530.9 531.7 – 0.8 358.2 365.0 – 6.8
2021 Q1 75.0 127.5 –52.5 113.7 120.7 – 7.1 61.1 69.7 – 8.6
Q2 86.4 123.5 –37.1 122.8 122.0 + 0.8 74.6 71.7 + 2.9
Q3 93.9 114.7 –20.7 125.9 120.2 + 5.7 74.6 74.9 – 0.3
Q4 115.1 146.3 –31.2 145.6 144.5 + 1.2 97.6 87.0 +10.6
2022 Q1 94.7 114.0 –19.3 134.6 122.7 +11.9 68.4 73.8 – 5.4
Q2 99.7 123.5 –23.7 133.2 123.6 + 9.6 81.0 77.3 + 3.7
Q3 89.0 127.8 –38.7 126.1 121.4 + 4.7 81.1 80.3 + 0.8
Q4 116.1 150.4 –34.2 139.6 153.4 –13.8 98.0 94.5 + 3.5
2023 Q1 96.2 116.9 –20.7 121.0 122.3 – 1.3 73.3 81.0 – 7.7
Q2 101.8 119.6 –17.7 138.5 133.6 + 4.9 87.0 86.6 + 0.4
Q3 106.1 115.9 – 9.8 123.1 120.0 + 3.2 87.4 91.5 – 4.1
Q4 121.2 137.8 –16.6 146.9 154.4 – 7.5 110.4 105.8 + 4.6
2024 Q1 102.8 111.6 – 8.7 129.2 133.9 – 4.7 76.7 90.6 –13.9
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office data and Bundesbank
calculations.  1 Any amounts of the Bundesbank's profit distribution exceeding the
reference value that were used to repay parts of the debt of central government'sspecial funds are not included here.  2 Including the local authority level of the city
states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg.  3 Data of core budgets and off-budget entities
which are assigned to the general government sector.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
60•
X. Public finances in Germany
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Period Total TotalCentral
government  1State
government  1 European Union  2Local
government  3Balance of
untransferred
tax shares  4Memo item:
Amounts deducted
in the Federal
budget  5
2017 734,540 629,458 336,730 271,046 21,682 105,158 – 76 27,368
2018 776,314 665,005 349,134 287,282 28,589 111,308 + 1 26,775
2019 799,416 684,491 355,050 298,519 30,921 114,902 + 23 25,998
2020 739,911 632,268 313,381 286,065 32,822 107,916 – 274 30,266
2021 833,337 706,978 342,988 325,768 38,222 125,000 + 1,359 29,321
2022 895,854 760,321 372,121 349,583 38,617 134,146 + 1,387 34,911
2023 915,893 774,112 389,114 349,554 35,444 143,663 – 1,882 33,073
2022 Q1 224,006 189,158 92,112 87,240 9,806 24,772 + 10,077 7,261
Q2 224,538 190,982 94,153 86,852 9,977 34,149 – 594 11,576
Q3 205,544 174,232 84,078 80,020 10,133 33,618 – 2,306 7,953
Q4 241,767 205,950 101,778 95,471 8,702 41,607 – 5,790 8,121
2023 Q1 220,950 186,173 93,366 83,536 9,271 26,505 + 8,271 7,665
Q2 221,225 186,597 94,492 82,961 9,144 35,152 – 525 8,959
Q3 230,151 195,334 98,626 87,824 8,884 34,958 – 141 8,678
Q4 243,568 206,008 102,631 95,233 8,145 47,048 – 9,488 7,770
2024 Q1 225,304 188,806 96,283 85,277 7,246 25,910 + 10,588 7,999
Q2 ... 196,883 100,461 88,881 7,541 ... ... 8,306
2023 July . 65,445 32,791 29,498 3,157 . . 3,426
2024 July . 59,743 30,166 26,973 2,605 . . 3,646
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations.  1 Before deducting or adding supplementary central government transfers,
regionalisation funds (local public transport), compensation for the transfer of motor
vehicle tax to central government and consolidation assistance, which central govern-
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these amounts
which are deducted from tax revenue in the Federal budget.  2 Customs duties andshares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from central government
tax revenue.  3 Including local government taxes in the city states Berlin, Bremen and
Hamburg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms.  4 Difference between local
government's share in the joint taxes received by the state government cash offices in
the period in question (see Table X. 6) and the amounts passed on to local govern-
ment in the same period.  5 Volume of the positions mentioned under footnote 1.
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
€ million
Joint taxes
Income taxes  2 Value added taxes (VAT)  7
Period Total  1 TotalWage
tax 3Assessed
income
tax 4Corpora-
tion tax  5Invest-
ment
income
tax 6 TotalDomestic
VATImport
VATLocal
business
tax
trans-
fers  8Central
govern-
ment
taxes  9State
govern-
ment
taxes  9EU
customs
dutiesMemo
item:
Local
govern-
ment
share in
joint
taxes
2017 674,598 312,462 195,524 59,428 29,259 28,251 226,355 170,498 55,856 8,580 99,934 22,205 5,063 45,141
2018 713,576 332,141 208,231 60,415 33,425 30,069 234,800 175,437 59,363 9,078 108,586 23,913 5,057 48,571
2019 735,869 344,016 219,660 63,711 32,013 28,632 243,256 183,113 60,143 8,114 109,548 25,850 5,085 51,379
2020 682,376 320,798 209,286 58,982 24,268 28,261 219,484 168,700 50,784 3,954 105,632 27,775 4,734 50,107
2021 760,953 370,296 218,407 72,342 42,124 37,423 250,800 187,631 63,169 4,951 98,171 31,613 5,122 53,976
2022 814,886 390,111 227,205 77,411 46,334 39,161 284,850 198,201 86,649 6,347 96,652 30,097 6,829 54,565
2023 829,774 399,271 236,227 73,388 44,852 44,803 291,394 212,596 78,798 6,347 101,829 25,199 5,734 55,662
2022 Q1 203,130 96,245 56,206 20,915 11,178 7,946 73,584 54,234 19,350 615 22,252 8,975 1,459 13,972
Q2 204,740 101,822 60,363 17,194 11,246 13,019 67,763 46,755 21,008 1,521 24,441 7,564 1,630 13,758
Q3 185,552 82,392 43,431 17,598 10,724 10,639 71,164 49,323 21,841 1,471 21,657 7,115 1,753 11,320
Q4 221,464 109,652 67,205 21,704 13,186 7,557 72,339 47,889 24,451 2,740 28,302 6,444 1,987 15,514
2023 Q1 199,764 94,453 55,669 19,728 10,700 8,357 73,522 52,197 21,325 370 23,110 6,815 1,494 13,591
Q2 199,993 98,917 59,538 15,467 12,406 11,506 67,260 47,855 19,405 1,499 24,740 6,142 1,435 13,396
Q3 208,722 98,832 56,370 17,010 9,902 15,550 76,093 56,986 19,106 1,583 24,665 6,160 1,389 13,388
Q4 221,295 107,069 64,651 21,184 11,844 9,390 74,519 55,557 18,962 2,895 29,314 6,082 1,417 15,287
2024 Q1 202,975 97,423 57,101 19,102 10,141 11,080 73,613 56,469 17,144 489 23,846 6,478 1,125 14,168
Q2 211,033 105,931 62,650 14,831 10,361 18,089 71,247 52,496 18,751 1,604 24,634 6,257 1,360 14,150
2023 July 69,269 30,941 20,130 –185 –282 11,278 26,792 20,301 6,491 1,245 7,689 2,104 498 3,824
2024 July 63,814 27,017 21,381 –10 –590 6,236 24,456 18,258 6,199 1,298 8,138 2,484 422 4,071
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations.  1 This total, unlike
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of untrans-
ferred tax shares.  2 Respective percentage share of central, state and local government
in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corporation tax and
non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on interest income and
capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12.  3 After deducting child benefits
and subsidies for supplementary private pension plans.  4 After deducting employeerefunds and research grants.  5 After deducting research grants.  6 Final withholding tax
on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings.  7 The allocation
of revenue to central, state and local government, which is adjusted at more regular
intervals, is regulated in Section 1 of the Revenue Adjustment Act. Respective percent-
age share of central, state and local government in revenue for 2023: 47.5:49.7:2.8.
The EU share is deducted from central government's share.  8 Respective percentage
share of central and state government for 2023: 41.4:58.6.  9 For the breakdown, see
Table X. 7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
61•
X. Public finances in Germany
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
of which:
PeriodEnergy
taxSoli-
darity
surchargeInsurance
taxTobacco
taxMotor
vehicle
taxElectri-
city taxAlcohol
tax OtherTax on
the acqui-
sition of
land and
buildingsInherit-
ance
taxBetting
and
lottery
tax Other TotalLocal
business
tax 2Real
property
taxes
2017 41,022 17,953 13,269 14,399 8,948 6,944 2,094 – 4,695 13,139 6,114 1,837 1,115 68,522 52,899 13,966
2018 40,882 18,927 13,779 14,339 9,047 6,858 2,133 2,622 14,083 6,813 1,894 1,122 71,817 55,904 14,203
2019 40,683 19,646 14,136 14,257 9,372 6,689 2,118 2,648 15,789 6,987 1,975 1,099 71,661 55,527 14,439
2020 37,635 18,676 14,553 14,651 9,526 6,561 2,238 1,792 16,055 8,600 2,044 1,076 61,489 45,471 14,676
2021 37,120 11,028 14,980 14,733 9,546 6,691 2,089 1,984 18,335 9,824 2,333 1,121 77,335 61,251 14,985
2022 33,667 11,978 15,672 14,229 9,499 6,830 2,191 2,585 17,122 9,226 2,569 1,180 87,315 70,382 15,282
2023 36,658 12,239 16,851 14,672 9,514 6,832 2,159 2,904 12,203 9,286 2,477 1,233 92,466 75,265 15,493
2022 Q1 4,452 2,840 7,175 2,372 2,594 1,785 531 503 5,061 2,827 701 385 21,492 17,454 3,577
Q2 9,092 3,518 2,872 3,648 2,433 1,722 505 651 4,406 2,238 661 259 21,318 16,839 4,077
Q3 7,103 2,571 3,059 3,742 2,325 1,598 549 710 4,100 2,138 596 281 21,463 16,792 4,249
Q4 13,020 3,049 2,567 4,467 2,147 1,725 606 722 3,555 2,023 611 254 23,043 19,298 3,380
2023 Q1 4,362 2,888 7,637 2,669 2,632 1,749 530 643 3,362 2,368 666 420 21,555 17,471 3,610
Q2 8,796 3,649 3,091 3,830 2,475 1,669 517 712 2,937 2,323 615 267 22,731 18,117 4,192
Q3 9,477 2,607 3,309 3,879 2,339 1,749 532 773 2,997 2,302 577 284 23,013 18,294 4,271
Q4 14,023 3,095 2,813 4,294 2,068 1,665 580 776 2,907 2,292 620 263 25,168 21,383 3,421
2024 Q1 4,488 3,028 8,255 2,672 2,661 1,540 520 681 2,986 2,388 651 453 22,819 18,587 3,718
Q2 8,717 3,491 3,355 3,905 2,533 1,313 460 859 3,050 2,314 609 285 ... ... ...
2023 July 3,038 550 911 1,403 783 579 188 237 988 841 183 92 . . .
2024 July 3,077 704 967 1,645 858 420 175 293 1,190 1,004 200 90 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations.  1 For the sum total, see Table X. 6.  2 Including revenue from offshore wind
farms.
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets *
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  3
of which: of which:
Period TotalContri-
butions  2Payments
from central
government TotalPension
paymentsPensioners'
health
insuranceDeficit/
surplus Total Deposits  4 SecuritiesMemo item:
Administrative
assets
2017 299,826 211,424 87,502 299,297 255,261 18,028 + 529 35,366 33,740 1,335 4,032
2018 312,788 221,572 90,408 308,356 263,338 18,588 + 4,432 40,345 38,314 1,713 4,008
2019 327,298 232,014 94,467 325,436 277,282 20,960 + 1,861 42,963 40,531 2,074 3,974
2020 335,185 235,988 98,447 339,072 289,284 21,865 – 3,887 39,880 38,196 1,286 3,901
2021 348,679 245,185 102,772 347,486 296,343 22,734 + 1,192 42,014 40,320 1,241 3,807
2022 363,871 258,269 104,876 360,436 308,168 23,792 + 3,435 46,087 44,181 1,399 3,746
2023 382,540 271,852 108,836 381,073 325,369 25,346 + 1,467 48,869 46,649 1,637 3,697
2021 Q1 83,066 57,351 25,542 86,048 73,799 5,600 – 2,982 36,888 35,326 1,166 3,887
Q2 86,386 60,666 25,545 86,486 73,905 5,679 – 100 36,941 35,554 988 3,871
Q3 85,535 59,941 25,468 87,123 74,453 5,718 – 1,588 36,041 34,670 973 3,840
Q4 92,818 67,211 25,415 87,385 74,556 5,730 + 5,432 41,974 40,310 1,241 3,835
2022 Q1 86,684 60,599 25,937 86,841 74,568 5,734 – 157 41,784 39,952 1,367 3,783
Q2 90,040 63,978 25,879 87,138 74,644 5,756 + 2,903 44,425 42,441 1,513 3,761
Q3 89,284 62,891 26,218 92,606 79,400 6,127 – 3,322 41,548 39,767 1,315 3,775
Q4 96,931 70,750 25,995 93,444 79,944 6,170 + 3,487 46,082 44,186 1,399 3,767
2023 Q1 91,370 64,171 26,972 92,422 79,330 6,142 – 1,052 45,109 43,030 1,569 3,724
Q2 94,735 67,459 26,942 92,585 79,177 6,165 + 2,151 47,245 45,043 1,693 3,705
Q3 93,776 66,300 26,950 97,619 83,549 6,513 – 3,843 44,354 42,208 1,632 3,703
Q4 101,578 73,852 27,041 97,967 83,678 6,520 + 3,611 48,825 46,660 1,637 3,697
2024 Q1 96,340 67,378 28,344 97,801 83,894 6,560 – 1,461 46,926 44,166 2,179 3,758
Q2 99,956 71,411 27,848 98,246 83,818 6,604 + 1,710 48,873 46,253 2,024 3,748
Sources: German pension insurance scheme and Bundesbank calculations.  * Excluding
the German pension insurance scheme for mining, railway and maritime industries. The
final annual figures generally differ from the total of the reported quarterly figures as
the latter are not revised.  1 Including financial compensation payments. Excluding in-vestment spending and proceeds.  2 Including contributions for recipients of govern-
ment cash benefits.  3 Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or
quarter.  4 Including cash.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
62•
X. Public finance in Germany
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development *
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Period Total  1 ContributionsInsolvency
compen-
sation levy TotalUnemploy-
ment benefit  2Short-time
working
benefits  3Job
promotion  4Insolvency
benefit
paymentAdminis-
trative
expenditure  5Deficit/
surplusMemo item:
Deficit-
offsetting
grant or loan
from central
government
2017 37,819 32,501 882 31,867 14,055 769 7,043 687 6,444 + 5,952 –
2018 39,335 34,172 622 33,107 13,757 761 6,951 588 8,129 + 6,228 –
2019 35,285 29,851 638 33,154 15,009 772 7,302 842 6,252 + 2,131 –
2020 33,678 28,236 630 61,013 20,617 22,719 7,384 1,214 6,076 –27,335 6,913
2021 35,830 29,571 1,302 57,570 19,460 21,003 7,475 493 6,080 –21,739 16,935
2022 37,831 31,651 1,062 37,530 16,588 3,779 7,125 534 6,256 + 300 423
2023 42,245 36,058 748 39,233 18,799 981 7,614 1,236 7,006 + 3,012 – 423
2021 Q1 8,228 6,747 289 18,260 5,956 8,006 1,935 184 1,391 –10,033 –
Q2 8,830 7,301 324 16,720 5,029 7,495 1,912 108 1,452 – 7,890 –
Q3 8,791 7,290 330 12,042 4,447 3,631 1,744 91 1,452 – 3,251 –
Q4 9,982 8,234 359 10,547 4,028 1,871 1,884 110 1,785 – 565 16,935
2022 Q1 8,827 7,374 251 10,685 4,424 2,037 1,821 135 1,412 – 1,858 –
Q2 9,327 7,857 262 9,457 4,091 1,180 1,794 147 1,450 – 130 –
Q3 9,278 7,740 261 8,401 4,056 406 1,621 107 1,506 + 877 –
Q4 10,398 8,679 289 8,987 4,016 156 1,889 145 1,888 + 1,411 423
2023 Q1 9,836 8,442 178 9,942 4,727 408 1,858 376 1,550 – 106 –
Q2 10,387 8,976 186 9,661 4,604 290 1,902 271 1,689 + 726 –
Q3 10,361 8,804 182 9,351 4,712 140 1,775 284 1,691 + 1,010 –
Q4 11,661 9,836 202 10,278 4,755 144 2,079 306 2,076 + 1,382 – 423
2024 Q1 10,298 8,903 183 11,237 5,511 465 2,074 380 1,729 – 939 –
Q2 11,019 9,494 196 11,175 5,447 330 2,167 498 1,811 – 156 –
Source: Federal Employment Agency and Bundesbank calculations.  * Including transfers
to the civil servants' pension fund.  1 Excluding central government deficit-offsetting
grant or loan.  2 Unemployment benefit in case of unemployment.  3 Including seasonal
short-time working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, re-
structuring measures and refunds of social contributions.  4 Vocational training, meas-ures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, integration, compensation top-up pay-
ments and promotion of business start-ups.  5 Including collection charges to other
social security funds, excluding administrative expenditure within the framework of the
basic allowance for job seekers.
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1
of which: of which:
Period TotalContri-
butions Central
government
funds  2 TotalHospital
treatmentPharma-
ceuticalsMedical
treatmentDental
treatment  3Remedies
and
therapeutic
appliancesSickness
benefitsAdminis-
trative
expend-
iture  4Deficit/
surplus
2017 233,814 216,227 14,500 230,773 72,303 37,389 38,792 14,070 14,776 12,281 10,912 +3,041
2018 242,360 224,912 14,500 239,706 74,506 38,327 39,968 14,490 15,965 13,090 11,564 +2,654
2019 251,295 233,125 14,500 252,440 77,551 40,635 41,541 15,010 17,656 14,402 11,136 –1,145
2020 269,158 237,588 27,940 275,268 78,531 42,906 44,131 14,967 18,133 15,956 11,864 –6,110
2021 289,270 249,734 36,977 294,602 82,748 46,199 45,058 16,335 20,163 16,612 11,727 –5,332
2022 315,248 262,367 50,223 310,594 85,061 48,354 46,379 16,737 21,259 17,947 12,418 +4,654
2023 304,441 278,742 21,896 309,596 90,891 49,653 47,157 17,593 23,214 19,112 12,681 –5,155
2021 Q1 72,970 59,338 13,303 72,660 19,631 11,175 11,564 4,069 4,564 4,287 2,967 + 310
Q2 71,964 61,819 9,965 74,492 20,287 11,275 11,536 4,219 5,085 4,120 2,850 –2,529
Q3 70,592 61,899 7,942 73,569 20,748 11,756 10,730 4,060 5,085 4,004 2,849 –2,977
Q4 74,020 66,678 5,767 73,209 21,340 12,043 11,252 4,062 5,290 4,200 3,109 + 810
2022 Q1 79,253 62,142 17,049 81,493 20,550 11,891 11,847 4,286 5,216 4,574 3,510 –2,240
Q2 79,112 64,611 14,280 79,269 21,080 12,053 11,753 4,249 5,335 4,457 2,958 – 158
Q3 75,516 65,242 9,804 75,011 21,164 12,221 11,384 3,956 5,352 4,441 2,996 + 505
Q4 81,512 70,384 9,091 74,894 21,659 12,242 11,566 4,310 5,442 4,486 3,148 +6,617
2023 Q1 73,718 66,513 6,759 77,593 22,196 12,209 12,012 4,370 5,621 4,927 3,169 –3,875
Q2 73,722 68,792 4,495 76,031 22,421 12,284 11,762 4,476 5,762 4,682 3,166 –2,309
Q3 75,330 69,236 5,244 76,967 22,632 12,540 11,502 4,371 5,958 4,695 3,030 –1,637
Q4 81,548 74,199 5,399 78,860 23,218 12,720 11,923 4,437 5,802 4,809 3,452 +2,688
2024 Q1 75,004 70,700 3,617 80,253 24,066 13,319 12,519 4,599 6,148 5,148 3,069 –5,249
Q2 79,051 73,540 4,609 82,224 24,071 13,634 12,423 4,587 6,292 5,118 3,190 –3,174
Source: Federal Ministry of Health and Bundesbank calculations.  1 The final annual fig-
ures generally differ from the total of the reported quarterly figures as the latter are not
revised. Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compensationscheme.  2 Federal grant and liquidity assistance.  3 Including dentures.  4 Net, i.e. after
deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying contributions incurred by other
social security funds.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
63•
X. Public finances in Germany
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development *
€ million
Revenue Expenditure  1
of which: of which:
Period Total Contributions TotalNon-cash
care benefitsInpatient
care total  2Nursing
benefitContributions to
pension insur-
ance scheme  3Administrative
expenditureDeficit/
surplus
2017 36,305 36,248 38,862 6,923 16,034 10,010 1,611 1,606 – 2,557
2018 37,949 37,886 41,265 7,703 16,216 10,809 2,093 1,586 – 3,315
2019 47,228 46,508 44,008 8,257 16,717 11,689 2,392 1,781 + 3,220
2020 50,622 48,003 49,284 8,794 16,459 12,786 2,714 1,946 + 1,338
2021 52,573 49,764 53,903 9,573 16,511 13,865 3,070 2,024 – 1,330
2022 57,944 52,604 60,100 10,405 20,542 14,872 3,223 2,166 – 2,156
2023 61,374 58,807 59,178 11,506 22,513 16,035 3,582 2,267 + 2,196
2021 Q1 12,093 11,831 13,344 2,355 3,971 3,387 725 512 – 1,251
Q2 12,933 12,329 13,521 2,287 4,030 3,421 745 510 – 587
Q3 12,624 12,294 13,390 2,393 4,182 3,466 783 509 – 767
Q4 14,853 13,242 13,595 2,475 4,270 3,646 788 503 + 1,258
2022 Q1 12,912 12,412 14,739 2,564 4,974 3,572 775 529 – 1,827
Q2 15,350 12,951 14,827 2,464 5,026 3,698 795 548 + 523
Q3 13,708 13,021 15,387 2,638 5,197 3,755 802 542 – 1,679
Q4 15,813 14,067 15,078 2,581 5,281 3,892 837 528 + 735
2023 Q1 14,283 13,169 14,698 2,876 5,377 3,846 843 570 – 415
Q2 14,227 13,668 14,392 2,745 5,539 3,940 869 561 – 165
Q3 15,585 15,228 14,823 2,867 5,776 4,074 891 571 + 762
Q4 16,920 16,469 15,317 2,863 5,782 4,317 949 560 + 1,603
2024 Q1 15,896 15,525 16,546 3,207 6,038 4,387 950 645 – 651
Q2 16,544 16,223 16,792 3,161 6,153 4,581 988 607 – 247
Source: Federal Ministry of Health and Bundesbank calculations.  * The final annual fig-
ures generally differ from the total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the
latter are not revised.  1 Including transfers to the long-term care provident fund.  2 In-cluding benefits for short-term care and daytime/night-time nursing care, inter alia.
3 For non-professional carers.
12. Maastricht debt by creditor
€ million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Bundesbank Domestic MFIsOther domestic
financial corporations Other domestic creditors Foreign creditors
of which: of which: of which: of which: of which: Period
(end of year
or quarter) Total Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities
2017 2,130,324 319,159 305,301 546,063 194,619 180,104 81,125 56,798 10,456 1,028,201 941,750
2018 2,083,675 364,731 350,487 504,476 167,506 186,346 89,794 56,071 8,725 972,052 892,222
2019 2,069,889 366,562 352,025 465,628 158,119 183,714 88,771 64,379 7,225 989,606 908,749
2020 2,340,849 522,392 507,534 505,373 157,828 191,231 99,840 54,238 8,373 1,067,615 996,417
2021 2,495,538 716,004 700,921 497,968 144,646 191,580 103,049 51,633 7,435 1,038,353 969,245
2022 2,561,674 742,514 727,298 509,376 128,892 210,885 126,039 58,165 10,782 1,040,734 975,548
p 2023 2,622,669 696,287 680,801 461,592 126,354 207,203 124,202 72,214 23,030 1,185,373 1,121,033
2021 Q1 2,369,872 561,444 546,540 480,026 162,961 190,136 99,333 63,796 8,060 1,074,470 1,010,641
Q2 2,419,762 620,473 605,430 481,517 151,182 189,993 99,735 53,897 7,699 1,073,882 1,008,532
Q3 2,453,545 669,659 654,600 484,986 152,068 191,571 101,742 54,275 8,070 1,053,054 987,736
Q4 2,495,538 716,004 700,921 497,968 144,646 191,580 103,049 51,633 7,435 1,038,353 969,245
2022 Q1 2,499,123 737,978 722,843 481,772 143,411 194,096 106,165 50,834 6,959 1,034,442 967,915
Q2 2,537,416 759,385 744,213 485,428 133,999 202,681 115,577 53,612 8,086 1,036,310 970,547
Q3 2,551,282 741,360 726,147 512,999 126,865 202,278 116,268 55,917 8,987 1,038,727 968,178
Q4 2,561,674 742,514 727,298 509,376 128,892 210,885 126,039 58,165 10,782 1,040,734 975,548
p 2023 Q1 2,587,201 741,587 726,326 480,650 129,372 208,934 124,777 63,478 16,123 1,092,551 1,029,541
pQ2 2,586,471 719,981 704,639 458,449 125,988 209,153 124,769 65,763 20,879 1,133,126 1,069,341
pQ3 2,627,247 706,113 690,704 455,180 126,626 208,036 124,077 67,819 23,354 1,190,099 1,124,411
pQ4 2,622,669 696,287 680,801 461,592 126,354 207,203 124,202 72,214 23,030 1,185,373 1,121,033
p 2024 Q1 2,635,910 683,097 667,557 458,913 128,892 204,031 123,217 76,303 24,400 1,213,567 1,150,545
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
64•
X. Public finances in Germany
13. Maastricht debt by instrument
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:  2
Period
(end of year
or quarter) TotalCurrency
and deposits  1Short-term
debt securities
(up to one year)Long-term
debt securities
(more than one year)Short-term loans
(up to one year)Long-term loans
(more than one year)Debt vis-à-vis
other government
subsectorsClaims vis-à-vis
other government
subsectors
General government
2017 2,130,324 14,298 48,789 1,484,462 88,841 493,934 . .
2018 2,083,675 14,680 52,572 1,456,160 79,171 481,091 . .
2019 2,069,889 14,449 56,350 1,458,540 64,464 476,086 . .
2020 2,340,849 14,486 173,851 1,596,141 85,384 470,987 . .
2021 Q1 2,369,872 12,283 190,039 1,637,496 62,705 467,348 . .
Q2 2,419,762 13,065 182,676 1,689,902 69,170 464,949 . .
Q3 2,453,545 13,565 192,489 1,711,727 70,496 465,268 . .
Q4 2,495,538 17,743 195,421 1,729,876 88,481 464,017 . .
2022 Q1 2,499,123 15,676 172,809 1,774,484 70,930 465,223 . .
Q2 2,537,416 17,793 161,844 1,810,578 76,484 470,717 . .
Q3 2,551,282 22,631 149,825 1,796,620 82,049 500,157 . .
Q4 2,561,674 16,985 150,371 1,818,189 112,199 463,932 . .
p 2023 Q1 2,587,201 14,994 145,736 1,880,403 83,437 462,631 . .
pQ2 2,586,471 14,990 154,379 1,891,236 66,864 459,003 . .
pQ3 2,627,247 17,760 165,992 1,923,180 59,627 460,688 . .
pQ4 2,622,669 16,514 148,889 1,926,532 66,232 464,502 . .
p 2024 Q1 2,635,910 14,910 135,667 1,958,944 62,540 463,849 . .
Central government
2017 1,361,492 14,298 36,297 1,131,896 48,305 130,696 1,131 10,618
2018 1,334,500 14,680 42,246 1,107,140 43,067 127,367 933 9,975
2019 1,312,338 14,449 38,480 1,101,866 29,956 127,587 605 10,301
2020 1,526,491 14,486 154,498 1,180,683 48,414 128,410 609 14,521
2021 Q1 1,552,060 12,283 167,485 1,212,495 31,284 128,513 604 22,929
Q2 1,602,137 13,065 165,374 1,259,206 36,297 128,195 647 29,448
Q3 1,630,056 13,565 170,962 1,280,586 37,116 127,826 693 31,382
Q4 1,679,310 17,743 176,428 1,300,416 57,779 126,943 618 8,078
2022 Q1 1,684,290 15,676 155,123 1,340,340 41,680 131,472 576 10,430
Q2 1,723,415 17,793 147,681 1,373,616 47,196 137,129 623 10,491
Q3 1,757,005 22,631 144,999 1,369,628 55,559 164,188 828 13,101
Q4 1,775,982 16,985 146,989 1,391,638 93,352 127,017 8,815 9,011
p 2023 Q1 1,798,688 14,994 140,641 1,456,147 59,981 126,926 3,664 10,500
pQ2 1,806,085 14,990 150,168 1,471,888 41,802 127,237 2,889 11,235
pQ3 1,848,614 17,760 161,140 1,503,891 38,943 126,880 6,373 9,852
pQ4 1,850,057 16,514 144,507 1,511,599 51,457 125,980 15,858 9,103
p 2024 Q1 1,856,300 14,910 129,404 1,533,118 51,608 127,259 18,539 10,437
State government
2017 616,785 – 12,543 354,688 19,790 229,764 14,038 2,046
2018 603,166 – 10,332 351,994 19,250 221,590 14,035 1,891
2019 612,698 – 17,873 360,495 19,076 215,254 14,934 1,826
2020 664,421 – 19,354 419,862 19,481 205,724 11,924 1,410
2021 Q1 667,651 – 22,556 429,623 14,375 201,097 10,942 1,995
Q2 667,940 – 17,304 435,709 16,178 198,750 12,454 2,041
Q3 673,373 – 21,528 436,499 16,334 199,012 11,414 2,110
Q4 665,250 – 18,994 434,930 14,074 197,252 12,441 1,772
2022 Q1 663,426 – 17,688 439,767 12,533 193,438 11,634 1,915
Q2 660,169 – 14,166 442,621 12,404 190,979 11,393 1,742
Q3 643,826 – 4,828 432,653 14,873 191,472 14,067 2,147
Q4 634,151 – 3,384 432,186 9,881 188,700 11,585 1,719
p 2023 Q1 631,953 – 5,099 429,985 10,976 185,893 11,918 2,360
pQ2 624,231 – 4,215 424,818 11,908 183,291 13,336 2,041
pQ3 621,611 – 4,856 424,945 8,727 183,084 11,049 2,629
pQ4 623,057 – 4,392 421,349 12,631 184,684 11,519 5,357
p 2024 Q1 630,848 – 6,272 432,381 11,585 180,610 12,385 12,405
Local government
2017 168,304 – – 3,082 24,909 140,313 1,881 466
2018 162,175 – 1 3,046 20,903 138,225 1,884 497
2019 161,367 – – 2,996 19,607 138,763 1,856 532
2020 163,163 – – 3,366 18,520 141,276 1,402 330
2021 Q1 163,189 – – 3,121 17,998 142,070 2,009 325
Q2 164,321 – – 3,121 18,969 142,231 2,070 323
Q3 163,772 – – 3,000 18,156 142,616 2,127 321
Q4 165,316 – – 3,241 18,011 144,064 1,813 313
2022 Q1 164,860 – – 3,052 17,532 144,276 1,884 349
Q2 166,840 – – 2,902 17,566 146,373 1,724 370
Q3 166,624 – – 2,856 15,623 148,145 2,098 392
Q4 172,244 – – 2,896 17,917 151,431 1,614 399
p 2023 Q1 173,042 – – 2,883 17,102 153,057 2,163 422
pQ2 172,832 – – 2,988 17,678 152,166 1,746 748
pQ3 175,462 – – 2,825 18,287 154,350 2,329 796
pQ4 177,735 – – 2,884 17,295 157,557 2,385 798
p 2024 Q1 180,561 – – 2,723 18,243 159,595 2,392 825
For footnotes see end of table.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
65•
X. Public finances in Germany
13. Maastricht debt by instrument (cont´d)
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:   2
Period
(end of year
or quarter) TotalCurrency
and deposits  1Short-term
debt securities
(up to one year)Long-term
debt securities
(more than one year)Short-term loans
(up to one year)Long-term loans
(more than one year)Debt vis-à-vis
other government
subsectorsClaims vis-à-vis
other government
subsectors
Social security funds
2017 807 – – – 262 545 15 3,934
2018 704 – – – 388 316 16 4,506
2019 899 – – – 375 524 16 4,753
2020 7,641 – – – 7,128 513 6,931 4,606
2021 Q1 16,381 – – – 15,985 395 15,853 4,160
Q2 21,395 – – – 20,995 400 20,860 4,220
Q3 24,449 – – – 24,053 395 23,872 4,292
Q4 553 – – – 131 422 19 4,729
2022 Q1 3,378 – – – 2,883 496 2,739 4,140
Q2 3,690 – – – 3,098 592 2,958 4,095
Q3 4,151 – – – 3,459 692 3,330 4,683
Q4 2,755 – – – 608 2,147 1,442 12,328
p 2023 Q1 3,527 – – – 1,411 2,115 2,263 6,728
pQ2 2,736 – – – 595 2,141 1,442 5,389
pQ3 3,754 – – – 1,600 2,154 2,442 8,917
pQ4 2,624 – – – 742 1,882 1,042 15,547
p 2024 Q1 3,036 – – – 1,195 1,841 1,519 11,168
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office and
the Federal Republic of Germany - Finance Agency.  1 Particularly liabilities resulting
from coins in circulation.  2 Besides direct loan relationships, claims and debt vis-à-visother government subsectors also comprise securities holdings purchased on the
market. No entry for general government as debt and claims are consolidated between
different government subsectors.
14. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category
€ million
Currency and deposits  2Debt securities
of which:  3 of which:  3
Period
(end of year
or quarter) Total  1 Total  1Federal
day bond Total  1Conventional
Federal
bonds
(Bunds)Conventional
Federal
notes
(Bobls)Conventional
Federal
Treasury
notes
(Schätze)  4Treasury
discount
paper
(Bubills)  5Federal
savings
notesGreen
Federal
securitiesInflation-
linked
Federal
securities  6Capital
indexation
of inflation-
linked
securities Loans  1
2007 987,909 6,675 . 917,584 564,137 173,949 102,083 37,385 10,287 . 13,464 506 63,650
2008 1,019,905 12,466 3,174 928,754 571,913 164,514 105,684 40,795 9,649 . 19,540 1,336 78,685
2009 1,086,173 9,981 2,495 1,013,072 577,798 166,471 113,637 104,409 9,471 . 24,730 1,369 63,121
2010 1,337,160 10,890 1,975 1,084,019 602,624 185,586 126,220 85,867 8,704 . 35,906 2,396 242,251
2011 1,346,869 10,429 2,154 1,121,331 615,200 199,284 130,648 58,297 8,208 . 44,241 3,961 215,109
2012 1,390,377 9,742 1,725 1,177,168 631,425 217,586 117,719 56,222 6,818 . 52,119 5,374 203,467
2013 1,392,735 10,582 1,397 1,192,025 643,200 234,759 110,029 50,004 4,488 . 51,718 4,730 190,127
2014 1,398,472 12,146 1,187 1,206,203 653,823 244,633 103,445 27,951 2,375 . 63,245 5,368 180,123
2015 1,371,933 13,949 1,070 1,188,463 663,296 232,387 96,389 18,536 1,305 . 74,495 5,607 169,521
2016 1,365,579 15,491 1,010 1,179,062 670,245 221,551 95,727 23,609 737 . 66,464 3,602 171,026
2017 1,361,492 14,298 966 1,168,193 693,687 203,899 91,013 10,037 289 . 72,855 4,720 179,001
2018 1,334,500 14,680 921 1,149,386 710,513 182,847 86,009 12,949 48 . 64,647 5,139 170,435
2019 1,312,338 14,449 –1,140,346 719,747 174,719 89,230 13,487 . . 69,805 6,021 157,543
2020 1,526,491 14,486 .1,335,181 801,910 179,560 98,543 113,141 . 9,876 58,279 3,692 176,824
2021 1,679,310 17,743 .1,476,844 892,464 190,839 103,936 153,978 . 21,627 65,390 6,722 184,722
2022 1,775,982 16,985 .1,538,628 947,349 198,084 113,141 137,990 . 36,411 72,357 15,844 220,369
p 2023 1,850,057 16,514 .1,656,105 1,045,613 216,276 119,180 135,469 . 53,965 60,470 14,686 177,438
2021 Q1 1,552,060 12,283 .1,379,980 814,864 189,935 103,910 134,800 . 11,026 60,687 3,857 159,797
Q2 1,602,137 13,065 .1,424,579 861,455 184,413 104,997 139,451 . 16,526 62,569 5,056 164,492
Q3 1,630,056 13,565 .1,451,549 869,195 198,692 105,398 146,533 . 19,824 63,851 5,456 164,942
Q4 1,679,310 17,743 .1,476,844 892,464 190,839 103,936 153,978 . 21,627 65,390 6,722 184,722
2022 Q1 1,684,290 15,676 .1,495,463 911,280 204,534 108,702 140,427 . 23,961 67,776 7,809 173,152
Q2 1,723,415 17,793 .1,521,297 937,949 198,472 111,343 138,495 . 29,425 70,217 11,209 184,325
Q3 1,757,005 22,631 .1,514,627 918,838 208,509 111,675 137,740 . 35,527 71,498 12,879 219,747
Q4 1,775,982 16,985 .1,538,628 947,349 198,084 113,141 137,990 . 36,411 72,357 15,844 220,369
p 2023 Q1 1,798,688 14,994 .1,596,787 987,363 213,514 120,904 127,143 . 39,459 73,591 15,497 186,907
pQ2 1,806,085 14,990 .1,622,056 1,007,004 211,742 124,160 139,012 . 50,243 59,227 13,604 169,039
pQ3 1,848,614 17,760 .1,665,030 1,021,675 226,340 125,255 148,407 . 52,763 59,923 13,863 165,823
pQ4 1,850,057 16,514 .1,656,105 1,045,613 216,276 119,180 135,469 . 53,965 60,470 14,686 177,438
p 2024 Q1 1,856,300 14,910 .1,662,522 1,054,941 226,133 119,517 119,164 . 58,565 60,312 14,048 178,867
Sources: Federal Republic of Germany - Finance Agency, Federal Statistical Office, and
Bundesbank calculations.  1 Comprises all of central government, i.e. all off-budget en-
tities in addition to the core budget, including the government-owned bad bank FMS
Wertmanagement and liabilities attributed to central government from an economic
perspective under the European System of Accounts (ESA) 2010.  2 Particularly liabilitiesresulting from coins in circulation.  3 Issuances by the Federal Republic of Germany. Ex-
cluding issuers' holdings of own securities but including those held by other govern-
ment entities.  4 Including medium-term notes issued by the Treuhand agency (expired
in 2011).  5 Including Federal Treasury financing papers (expired in 2014).  6 Excluding
inflation-induced indexation of capital.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
66•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
2022 2023 2024
2021 2022 2023 2021 2022 2023 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
Item Index 2020=100 Annual percentage change
At constant prices, chained
 I. Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 105.5 104.2 103.6 5.5 –1.2 –0.5 –2.9 2.5 –0.6 –3.2 –0.9 –4.0 –1.6
Construction 96.4 85.5 85.2 –3.6 –11.3 –0.4 –13.8 –2.3 –1.0 0.5 1.0 –3.5 –3.4
Wholesale/retail trade, transport and
storage, hotel and restaurant services 101.4 106.8 105.3 1.4 5.4 –1.4 0.7 –0.9 –2.3 –2.2 –0.3 0.7 1.6
Information and communication 108.6 109.2 113.3 8.6 0.5 3.7 –2.7 4.6 3.7 2.4 4.1 1.9 3.3
Financial and insurance activities 107.8 99.8 99.2 7.8 –7.4 –0.6 –5.1 –3.4 0.1 1.3 –0.4 0.8 1.3
Real estate activities 102.4 104.2 105.6 2.3 1.8 1.4 0.3 1.1 0.9 1.1 2.2 1.6 2.4
Business services  1 109.1 112.7 113.2 9.1 3.3 0.5 1.4 –0.7 0.8 0.3 1.6 1.3 2.2
Public services, education and health 101.5 106.0 107.6 1.5 4.5 1.5 4.5 2.6 1.6 0.6 1.3 1.4 1.6
Other services 101.0 118.1 120.5 1.0 16.9 2.0 14.8 3.0 1.6 1.6 1.9 1.2 1.5
Gross value added 103.8 105.6 105.9 3.8 1.7 0.3 –0.1 0.9 0.2 –0.6 0.8 –0.3 0.8
Gross domestic product  2 103.7 105.1 104.8 3.7 1.4 –0.3 –0.4 0.6 –0.4 –0.7 –0.4 –0.8 0.3
 II. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 102.3 108.0 107.6 2.3 5.6 –0.4 0.8 0.1 –0.2 –1.1 –0.2 0.8 0.1
Government consumption 103.4 103.6 103.4 3.4 0.1 –0.1 –1.2 –1.6 –1.9 1.2 1.9 1.5 2.9
Machinery and equipment 103.5 108.2 107.3 3.5 4.5 –0.8 5.3 4.3 –0.1 –2.9 –3.7 –5.7 –6.5
Premises 96.9 93.1 89.9 –3.1 –3.9 –3.4 –6.8 –4.3 –3.1 –2.8 –3.4 –5.0 –3.2
Other investment  4 107.0 109.8 115.0 7.0 2.6 4.7 2.3 4.9 4.3 4.4 5.1 4.9 4.4
Changes in inventories  5,6 . . . 0.7 –0.1 0.1 0.7 1.0 0.6 –0.3 –0.9 –1.0 –0.7
Domestic demand 103.0 105.9 105.4 3.0 2.8 –0.4 0.6 0.7 –0.2 –0.9 –1.2 –1.1 –0.7
Net exports  6 . . . 0.9 –1.3 0.1 –0.8 –0.2 –0.3 0.2 0.8 0.3 1.0
     Exports 110.0 113.3 113.0 10.0 3.1 –0.3 0.4 2.5 0.6 –1.7 –2.5 –2.2 0.3
     Imports 109.0 116.6 115.9 9.0 7.0 –0.6 2.6 3.3 1.3 –2.3 –4.4 –3.3 –2.0
Gross domestic product  2 103.7 105.1 104.8 3.7 1.4 –0.3 –0.4 0.6 –0.4 –0.7 –0.4 –0.8 0.3
At current prices (€ billion)
 III. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 1,840.8 2,075.1 2,205.6 5.3 12.7 6.3 9.4 8.8 7.1 5.1 4.5 3.7 3.0
Government consumption 820.2 869.8 905.2 6.6 6.1 4.1 5.3 2.3 3.1 5.4 5.3 5.7 5.5
Machinery and equipment 235.4 263.0 275.7 5.5 11.7 4.8 13.4 12.2 6.4 2.0 0.4 –3.8 –4.4
Premises 404.1 446.5 466.1 4.9 10.5 4.4 6.3 9.5 4.9 3.0 0.7 –2.3 –0.6
Other investment  4 139.7 148.8 158.0 9.0 6.5 6.2 6.1 6.4 5.8 5.9 6.6 6.5 7.5
Changes in inventories  5 46.6 52.0 7.2 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 3,486.8 3,855.1 4,017.9 6.8 10.6 4.2 7.9 6.8 4.4 2.9 2.9 1.8 2.8
Net exports 189.7 98.7 167.7 . . . . . . . . . .
     Exports 1,568.3 1,810.1 1,816.6 16.1 15.4 0.4 10.1 7.8 1.4 –3.7 –3.4 –2.0 1.0
     Imports 1,378.6 1,711.4 1,649.0 18.2 24.1 –3.6 13.6 6.6 –2.1 –9.2 –8.5 –5.8 –2.3
Gross domestic product  2 3,676.5 3,953.9 4,185.6 6.6 7.5 5.9 6.6 7.3 5.9 5.4 5.0 3.1 4.0
 IV. Prices (2020=100)
Private consumption 102.9 109.9 117.2 2.9 6.8 6.7 8.5 8.6 7.3 6.3 4.7 2.9 2.9
Gross domestic product 102.8 109.1 115.8 2.8 6.1 6.1 7.0 6.7 6.4 6.1 5.4 3.9 3.7
Terms of trade 97.3 94.0 97.6 –2.7 –3.5 3.8 –0.9 1.8 4.3 5.5 3.5 2.8 1.0
 V. Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,968.2 2,087.0 2,229.0 3.6 6.0 6.8 6.0 6.7 7.1 7.2 6.4 6.4 5.5
Entrepreneurial and property income 818.2 848.9 905.4 18.3 3.8 6.7 4.5 12.1 10.1 5.1 –0.5 –8.3 –2.1
National income 2,786.4 2,935.9 3,134.5 7.5 5.4 6.8 5.6 8.4 7.9 6.5 4.5 1.6 3.4
Memo item: Gross national income 3,800.8 4,097.1 4,332.2 7.5 7.8 5.7 6.9 7.2 5.9 5.4 4.5 2.9 4.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2024.  1 Professional, sci-
entific, technical, administration and support service activities.  2 Gross value added plus
taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products).  3 Including non-profit institu-tions serving households.  4 Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft ware
and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets.  5 Including net in-
crease in valuables.  6 Contribution of growth to GDP .

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
67•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
2. Output in the production sector *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Production
sector,
totalConstruc-
tion Energy Total Inter-
mediate
goods 
Capital
goods 
Durable
goodsNon-
durable
goodsManu-
facture of
basic metals
and
fabricated
metal
productsManu-
facture of
computers,
electronic
and optical
products
and electrical
equipmentMacinery
and
equipmentMotor
vehicels,
trailers
and semi-
trailers
2021 = 100
% of total  1   100 17.08 8.21 74.71 27.84 33.97 2.53 10.36 9.71 9.59 11.83 12.21
Period
2020 95.9 101.4 96.9 94.8 91.9 96.7 93.5 97.5 91.0 90.0 92.6 101.7
2021 99.3 99.1 99.9 99.3 99.4 99.2 99.2 99.4 99.4 99.3 99.3 99.0
2022 98.7 96.7 98.7 99.2 96.3 101.1 101.0 100.1 97.3 102.9 100.2 103.0
2023 97.0 95.6 84.8 98.6 90.7 106.4 93.5 95.6 93.5 103.7 99.3 116.1
2023 Q2 97.9 98.4 77.7 100.0 92.7 108.0 92.5 95.2 95.9 103.9 99.5 121.5
Q3 95.7 100.2 72.8 97.2 90.7 103.1 92.1 96.6 93.4 104.4 98.8 107.1
Q4 97.2 101.4 90.6 96.9 84.8 107.9 91.1 94.9 88.8 100.9 102.7 111.6
2024 Q1 92.1 80.4 90.5 95.0 89.3 99.9 89.4 95.3 90.7 96.1 90.0 111.1
x Q2 93.1 93.7 76.4 94.8 88.4 100.8 87.9 94.3 90.1 92.6 90.3 112.0
2 2023 July 97.6 105.1 75.4 98.4 92.4 104.0 91.4 97.6 94.2 104.1 99.4 108.7
2 Aug. 89.5 94.3 71.5 90.4 87.6 91.8 84.7 94.7 89.7 100.8 89.4 90.3
Sep. 100.0 101.3 71.5 102.8 92.1 113.4 100.3 97.4 96.4 108.3 107.6 122.3
Oct. 98.3 101.2 84.0 99.2 91.7 105.9 96.2 98.2 95.1 103.8 95.5 116.7
Nov. 102.1 103.4 91.1 103.0 91.2 114.5 97.2 98.7 95.2 105.0 103.1 128.4
Dec. 91.1 99.6 96.8 88.5 71.5 103.3 79.8 87.7 76.0 93.8 109.6 89.8
2024 Jan. 83.6 63.0 98.8 86.7 84.3 87.6 81.7 91.5 85.2 90.4 80.3 95.0
Feb. 90.7 81.0 85.8 93.5 87.8 98.8 90.1 92.3 88.8 93.6 87.9 112.9
Mar. 101.9 97.2 86.8 104.7 95.9 113.3 96.5 102.2 98.1 104.3 101.8 125.5
x Apr. 93.5 93.1 79.9 95.1 88.6 101.3 87.8 93.9 90.0 93.1 88.9 117.7
x May 90.3 91.6 75.5 91.6 86.7 95.5 80.5 94.9 88.0 87.7 86.3 102.6
x June 95.6 96.5 73.9 97.8 89.9 105.5 95.4 94.2 92.3 96.9 95.8 115.6
2,x,p July 92.4 100.4 75.9 92.4 87.1 96.6 84.8 94.9 87.6 90.9 89.9 100.8
Annual percentage change
2020 – 7.7 + 2.9 – 6.6 – 9.8 – 6.9 –14.0 – 8.2 – 3.8 –11.9 – 7.4 –13.5 –20.1
2021 + 3.5 – 2.3 + 3.1 + 4.7 + 8.2 + 2.6 + 6.1 + 1.9 + 9.2 +10.3 + 7.2 – 2.7
2022 – 0.6 – 2.4 – 1.2 – 0.1 – 3.1 + 1.9 + 1.8 + 0.7 – 2.1 + 3.6 + 0.9 + 4.0
2023 – 1.7 – 1.1 –14.1 – 0.6 – 5.8 + 5.2 – 7.4 – 4.5 – 3.9 + 0.8 – 0.9 +12.7
2023 Q2 – 0.3 – 0.2 –18.3 + 1.6 – 6.2 + 9.8 – 8.6 – 2.1 – 3.3 + 3.5 + 2.0 +20.7
Q3 – 2.9 + 0.1 –20.7 – 1.7 – 5.8 + 2.8 – 8.7 – 4.1 – 3.4 – 1.2 – 1.0 + 5.9
Q4 – 4.1 – 2.1 – 7.2 – 4.2 – 5.4 – 2.3 –10.6 – 6.9 – 5.3 – 4.4 – 6.2 – 0.7
2024 Q1 – 5.2 – 2.5 – 7.8 – 5.3 – 5.4 – 6.3 – 9.0 – 0.4 – 5.4 – 9.1 – 6.4 –10.5
x Q2 – 4.9 – 4.7 – 1.7 – 5.2 – 4.7 – 6.7 – 5.0 – 0.9 – 6.0 –10.9 – 9.2 – 7.8
2 2023 July – 2.3 + 1.2 –20.6 – 1.1 – 6.6 + 3.5 – 6.5 – 0.5 – 4.4 ± 0.0 + 0.8 + 6.4
2 Aug. – 2.3 – 0.8 –20.3 – 0.7 – 4.7 + 4.1 – 9.3 – 2.5 – 1.2 ± 0.0 – 3.2 +13.7
Sep. – 3.9 – 0.1 –21.2 – 3.1 – 6.0 + 1.1 –10.0 – 8.9 – 4.4 – 3.4 – 0.8 + 0.5
Oct. – 4.0 – 3.2 –10.1 – 3.7 – 5.4 – 0.7 –10.6 – 7.7 – 6.1 – 2.6 – 6.7 + 4.0
Nov. – 4.5 – 2.8 – 7.4 – 4.5 – 6.2 – 2.6 –10.8 – 5.9 – 5.3 – 7.1 – 5.8 – 1.6
Dec. – 3.7 – 0.1 – 4.3 – 4.5 – 4.5 – 3.5 –10.4 – 7.0 – 4.3 – 3.3 – 6.0 – 4.9
2024 Jan. – 5.4 – 6.5 – 3.7 – 5.3 – 6.5 – 5.3 – 9.7 – 1.4 – 5.1 – 7.5 – 5.2 – 9.6
Feb. – 5.7 – 1.6 – 9.5 – 6.1 – 5.4 – 8.3 – 7.0 + 0.2 – 5.6 – 9.0 – 7.8 –13.0
Mar. – 4.4 – 0.4 –10.6 – 4.5 – 4.5 – 5.2 –10.2 – 0.1 – 5.5 –10.6 – 6.3 – 8.9
x Apr. – 3.7 – 3.9 – 6.4 – 3.5 – 4.1 – 3.6 – 5.2 – 0.5 – 5.8 – 8.1 – 6.7 – 1.5
x May – 7.2 – 6.8 + 0.1 – 7.9 – 6.2 –11.5 –11.6 + 1.9 – 7.9 –14.3 –11.8 –17.5
x June – 3.7 – 3.5 + 2.1 – 4.2 – 3.7 – 5.0 + 1.6 – 4.1 – 4.6 –10.3 – 9.1 – 4.1
2,x,p July – 5.3 – 4.5 + 0.7 – 6.1 – 5.7 – 7.1 – 7.2 – 2.8 – 7.0 –12.7 – 9.6 – 7.3
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * For explanatory notes, see
Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tabels III.1.a to III.1.c  o Using
JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Share of gross value added at factor cost of the production
sector in the base year 2021.  2 Influenced by a change in holiday dates.  x Provisional;estimated and adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office to the results of the
Quarterly Production Survey and the Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction
industry, respectively.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
68•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
3. Orders received by industry *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Period 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change
Total
2021 99.4 +22.7 99.4 +27.3 99.4 +21.7 99.4 +11.2 99.5 +17.9 99.3 + 8.2
2022 105.1 + 5.7 110.3 +11.0 101.1 + 1.7 109.6 +10.3 113.2 +13.8 108.0 + 8.8
2023 101.2 – 3.7 100.0 – 9.3 101.6 + 0.5 105.1 – 4.1 100.4 –11.3 107.3 – 0.6
2023 July 95.7 –10.1 94.9 –17.2 95.1 – 6.4 104.8 + 1.9 88.4 –14.8 112.3 + 9.7
Aug. 89.8 – 5.9 90.7 –11.3 86.8 – 3.2 108.2 + 4.2 105.1 – 6.0 109.5 + 9.3
Sep. 98.6 – 4.3 96.6 – 8.2 99.6 – 0.4 100.8 –11.7 95.7 –16.2 103.0 – 9.8
Oct. 96.2 – 8.0 97.0 – 9.9 94.4 – 7.5 105.9 – 2.9 99.1 –15.2 109.0 + 3.2
Nov. 99.6 – 3.9 96.4 –10.6 100.4 + 0.5 109.7 ± 0.0 112.1 + 9.5 108.6 – 4.0
Dec. 109.0 + 8.0 92.4 – 8.9 121.5 +19.9 96.5 + 1.8 88.2 – 7.0 100.3 + 5.7
2024 Jan. 98.2 – 5.0 98.1 –12.0 98.0 + 0.1 100.4 – 3.9 85.1 – 8.8 107.3 – 2.0
Feb. 96.3 – 8.7 94.4 –11.3 96.4 – 7.8 106.2 – 1.5 89.0 –15.2 114.0 + 4.5
Mar. 105.8 – 2.5 102.6 – 7.5 106.9 + 0.4 113.2 + 1.2 105.7 – 8.4 116.7 + 5.8
Apr. 93.1 – 1.8 93.8 – 7.5 91.0 + 1.9 104.7 + 0.5 94.5 – 9.9 109.3 + 5.1
May 92.3 – 8.3 93.9 – 5.3 89.3 –12.2 107.6 + 8.6 113.6 +23.7 104.9 + 2.4
June 100.7 –10.9 94.4 – 7.5 104.7 –13.4 102.5 – 5.3 96.5 – 8.4 105.3 – 3.8
p July 100.0 + 4.5 97.8 + 3.1 101.5 + 6.7 100.5 – 4.1 90.5 + 2.4 105.1 – 6.4
From the domestic market
2021 99.3 +21.7 99.4 +26.9 99.3 +19.1 99.3 +10.2 99.2 + 8.9 99.3 +10.7
2022 105.6 + 6.3 112.5 +13.2 98.7 – 0.6 109.7 +10.5 111.3 +12.2 109.1 + 9.9
2023 100.9 – 4.5 103.1 – 8.4 99.1 + 0.4 99.7 – 9.1 99.5 –10.6 99.7 – 8.6
2023 July 98.4 – 8.1 97.5 –18.5 99.0 + 2.6 100.0 – 2.9 97.4 –13.3 101.0 + 1.7
Aug. 90.9 – 4.2 94.9 – 8.6 86.2 + 0.2 99.1 – 1.4 103.8 – 6.1 97.2 + 0.6
Sep. 93.7 – 9.7 95.4 –10.9 91.3 – 7.8 99.1 –14.9 103.3 – 5.3 97.5 –18.3
Oct. 96.0 – 7.3 100.2 – 9.9 91.2 – 4.5 102.9 – 8.4 93.6 –11.9 106.6 – 7.0
Nov. 99.1 – 6.5 100.0 –10.5 98.1 – 1.3 99.8 –13.9 97.4 –12.5 100.7 –14.4
Dec. 98.4 – 0.9 97.0 – 8.5 100.4 + 5.4 93.8 +10.5 89.9 + 5.8 95.3 +12.4
2024 Jan. 94.4 – 8.0 99.6 –13.2 89.7 – 2.9 94.3 – 4.1 85.5 – 9.9 97.8 – 1.8
Feb. 95.7 –10.1 96.4 –12.8 94.7 – 8.5 97.9 – 4.6 86.1 –13.6 102.6 – 1.2
Mar. 102.3 – 9.1 102.0 –11.1 102.3 – 7.6 104.1 – 5.5 100.9 –14.0 105.4 – 1.9
Apr. 90.9 – 8.6 94.7 –13.0 86.7 – 4.9 96.8 – 1.6 94.9 – 8.4 97.5 + 1.1
May 91.9 –13.1 92.8 –10.3 91.0 –16.6 92.8 – 3.4 85.1 –14.3 95.9 + 1.1
June 101.6 – 5.7 95.6 – 4.1 107.8 – 7.5 96.0 + 0.2 90.2 – 3.9 98.3 + 1.9
p July 102.6 + 4.3 100.6 + 3.2 105.5 + 6.6 95.6 – 4.4 85.1 –12.6 99.7 – 1.3
From abroad
2021 99.5 +23.6 99.4 +27.6 99.5 +23.1 99.4 +11.7 99.6 +23.4 99.3 + 6.5
2022 104.8 + 5.3 108.1 + 8.8 102.5 + 3.0 109.6 +10.3 114.4 +14.9 107.2 + 8.0
2023 101.5 – 3.1 96.8 –10.5 103.0 + 0.5 108.8 – 0.7 100.9 –11.8 112.8 + 5.2
2023 July 93.8 –11.5 92.3 –15.9 92.8 –11.2 108.1 + 5.4 83.2 –15.7 120.5 +15.2
Aug. 89.0 – 7.0 86.5 –14.1 87.2 – 5.0 114.3 + 7.7 105.9 – 5.9 118.4 +15.1
Sep. 102.1 – 0.3 97.7 – 5.5 104.4 + 3.8 101.9 – 9.6 91.4 –22.0 107.1 – 3.0
Oct. 96.4 – 8.5 93.8 –10.0 96.3 – 8.9 107.9 + 0.8 102.2 –16.8 110.7 +11.7
Nov. 100.0 – 1.8 92.8 –10.8 101.8 + 1.6 116.4 +10.3 120.5 +24.0 114.3 + 4.2
Dec. 116.6 +14.3 87.9 – 9.3 133.7 +27.7 98.4 – 3.1 87.2 –13.2 104.0 + 1.8
2024 Jan. 101.0 – 2.9 96.7 –10.8 102.8 + 1.7 104.5 – 3.9 84.8 – 8.1 114.3 – 2.1
Feb. 96.8 – 7.5 92.5 – 9.6 97.3 – 7.4 111.8 + 0.4 90.7 –16.1 122.3 + 8.2
Mar. 108.3 + 2.5 103.1 – 3.7 109.6 + 5.3 119.4 + 5.6 108.4 – 5.2 124.9 +11.1
Apr. 94.6 + 3.4 93.0 – 1.0 93.5 + 6.0 110.0 + 1.7 94.2 –10.9 117.9 + 7.7
May 92.6 – 4.4 94.9 – 0.1 88.3 – 9.4 117.7 +16.4 130.0 +48.6 111.5 + 3.4
June 100.1 –14.3 93.2 –10.6 102.9 –16.5 106.9 – 8.3 100.1 –10.5 110.4 – 7.2
p July 98.2 + 4.7 95.0 + 2.9 99.2 + 6.9 103.9 – 3.9 93.6 +12.5 109.0 – 9.5
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; for ex-
planatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables
III.2.a to III.2.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
69•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
4. Orders received by construction *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1
Structural engineering
Total TotalResidential
constructionIndustrial
constructionPublic sector
constructionCivil
engineering 
Industrial clientsPublic
sector  2
Zeit 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2020 91.1 –0.3 87.4 –0.7 91.9 +7.0 82.6 –8.6 88.4 +1.8 95.7 +0.1 85.9 –5.7 97.1 +1.5
2021 99.5 +9.2 99.4 +13.7 99.5 +8.3 99.4 +20.3 99.1 +12.1 99.6 +4.1 99.4 +15.7 99.5 +2.5
2022 104.4 +4.9 98.0 –1.4 95.7 –3.8 98.4 –1.0 104.3 +5.2 112.4 +12.9 105.8 +6.4 108.8 +9.3
2023 108.2 +3.6 93.6 –4.5 83.2 –13.1 96.2 –2.2 121.4 +16.4 126.6 +12.6 117.3 +10.9 114.8 +5.5
2023 June 113.4 +3.5 99.4 –1.3 94.3 –7.3 86.2 –11.3 166.7 +51.1 130.9 +8.5 110.2 +1.0 131.3 +13.5
July 121.2 +7.5 103.4 –4.8 92.1 –6.0 105.0 –6.7 138.6 +4.8 143.3 +21.6 116.8 +0.2 147.6 +24.8
Aug. 120.1 +21.9 93.2 +3.7 80.1 –3.3 99.6 +9.5 116.5 +4.7 153.8 +40.7 148.9 +54.8 112.7 –0.2
Sep. 120.4 +17.1 111.6 +15.6 82.9 –10.6 121.2 +24.1 180.1 +70.1 131.4 +18.7 137.5 +34.4 125.9 +13.6
Oct. 106.9 +6.1 87.8 +0.1 81.9 –3.5 89.5 +1.2 103.1 +7.8 130.7 +11.7 121.0 +14.6 107.2 +0.9
Nov. 92.1 –0.8 83.1 +1.8 70.9 –5.0 89.2 +10.5 105.0 –4.5 103.3 –3.4 104.7 +9.5 91.4 –10.8
Dec. 110.2 +5.7 97.8 –0.6 91.6 +3.9 89.1 –15.6 152.2 +39.5 125.6 +12.5 117.5 +0.8 114.3 +14.0
2024 Jan. 85.7 +3.6 71.8 –5.8 60.4 –16.6 77.8 –4.5 91.1 +30.0 103.0 +13.3 96.7 +7.7 90.0 +10.7
Feb. 96.7 +2.0 77.8 –1.5 71.9 –1.4 72.0 –14.5 120.4 +47.2 120.3 +5.0 101.6 –1.3 108.4 +8.0
Mar. 123.8 +2.3 102.4 –5.9 91.2 +3.2 103.4 –17.7 139.2 +15.3 150.5 +10.6 121.8 –9.1 149.8 +17.0
Apr. 109.8 +3.9 85.6 –4.0 82.3 –0.6 82.7 –7.4 108.0 –3.8 140.1 +10.9 117.4 +7.6 120.2 +2.0
May 112.9 +2.4 97.8 +5.0 85.0 –3.3 108.5 +15.8 104.3 –4.7 131.7 ±0.0 119.4 +3.4 124.7 +4.2
June 119.6 +5.5 97.0 –2.4 84.3 –10.6 101.0 +17.2 127.9 –23.3 147.7 +12.8 130.3 +18.2 131.5 +0.2
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; exclu-
ding value added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series – Seasonally adjustedbusiness statistics, Table III.2.f.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Excluding residential
construction.  2 Including road construction.
5. Retail trade turnover *
Adjusted for calendar variations o
of which:
In stores by enterprises main product range
Total 
Food, beverages,
tobacco  1Textiles,
clothing,
foodwear and
leather goodsInformation
and
communications
equipmentConstruction
and flooring
materials,
household
appliances,
furnitureRetail sale of
pharmaceutical
and medical
goods, cosmetic
and toilet
articlesRetail sale via
mail order houses
or via internet
as well as
other retail sale  2
At current
prices At 2015 prices At current prices
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2020 121.4 +5.6 115.9 +4.4 121.3 +8.1 81.9 –23.2 106.9 –1.8 117.1 +9.3 125.4 +5.6 168.6 +21.8
2021 124.7 +2.7 116.7 +0.7 121.7 +0.3 78.1 –4.6 95.4 –10.8 110.4 –5.7 135.2 +7.8 190.1 +12.8
2022 134.4 +7.8 115.8 –0.8 128.2 +5.3 102.9 +31.8 107.8 +13.0 122.8 +11.2 144.7 +7.0 188.9 –0.6
3 2023 137.7 +2.5 112.3 –3.0 136.0 +6.1 106.8 +3.8 107.9 +0.1 118.3 –3.7 149.5 +3.3 186.6 –1.2
2023 Apr. 137.6 +3.8 111.9 –4.0 137.3 +8.1 108.2 +6.4 95.0 +0.4 126.0 –3.4 144.0 +2.6 180.6 –2.1
May 140.9 +4.5 114.6 –1.8 139.4 +9.2 113.4 +3.1 91.8 +0.9 127.9 –1.2 147.9 +3.9 183.6 +1.0
June 138.0 +5.3 112.3 –0.5 136.7 +7.9 117.7 +11.5 95.4 +1.1 120.4 +0.2 148.5 +6.1 180.1 +3.2
July 139.6 +3.1 114.0 –1.6 139.9 +7.0 109.1 +3.3 99.8 –0.4 118.2 –3.4 152.9 +4.0 183.0 –1.2
Aug. 132.6 +2.2 107.9 –2.3 132.9 +5.2 102.4 +4.3 97.3 –1.7 111.2 –2.1 145.7 +4.5 168.6 –2.5
Sep. 133.0 ±0.0 107.4 –3.8 132.4 +6.3 105.0 –10.3 104.0 –4.2 112.4 –5.2 149.9 +3.8 169.2 –10.6
Oct. 141.7 +2.8 114.7 +0.1 137.2 +3.9 121.9 +5.1 111.5 –0.4 121.4 –3.3 156.5 +7.5 196.0 +1.3
Nov. 147.8 +1.0 120.1 –1.6 137.8 +4.2 117.8 +1.7 136.7 +1.3 122.0 –6.4 156.5 +2.2 231.9 –0.7
Dec. 154.5 +2.0 125.2 –0.5 155.2 +5.5 117.8 –5.2 142.7 –3.4 117.5 –6.6 166.8 +6.0 216.0 +1.3
2024 Jan. 126.8 +1.7 102.8 –1.2 127.8 +4.2 86.0 +1.4 106.8 –5.7 98.1 –7.2 150.5 +7.8 175.6 –0.5
Feb. 123.1 +0.1 99.3 –2.3 124.8 +1.3 83.5 ±0.0 97.5 –3.7 103.8 –4.1 145.9 +7.9 158.6 –5.3
Mar. 143.3 +2.9 114.9 +1.1 144.2 +4.9 104.7 +4.2 101.1 –5.2 126.9 –1.7 157.9 +5.3 186.9 +0.2
Apr. 140.1 +1.8 112.2 +0.3 140.6 +2.4 109.1 +0.8 94.1 –0.9 122.9 –2.5 152.4 +5.8 179.4 –0.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * Excluding value added tax;
for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics,
Table III.4.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Including stalls and markets.  2 Excludingstores, stalls and markets.  3 As of January 2023 figures are provisional, partially revised,
and particularly uncertain in recent months due to estimates for missing reports.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
70•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
6. Labour market *
Employment  1 Employment subject to social contributions  2 Short-time workers  3 Unemployment  4
Total of which: of which: of which:
Produc-
tion 
sectorServices 
excluding 
temporary 
employ-
mentTemporary 
employ-
mentSolely
jobs
exempt
from
social
contri-
butions  2TotalCyclically
induced TotalAssigned
to the
legal
category
of the
Third Book
of the
Social
Security
Code
(SGB III)
PeriodThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
changeThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
change ThousandsUnem-
ploy-
ment
rate 
in %  4,5Vacan-
cies, 
thou-
sands  4,6
2019 45,291 +0.9 33,518 +1.7 9,479 23,043 751 4,579 145 60 72,267 827 7 5.0 774
2020 44,965 –0.7 33,579 +0.2 9,395 23,277 660 4,290 2,939 2,847 2,695 1,137 5.9 613
2021 45,052 +0.2 33,897 +0.9 9,344 23,602 702 4,101 1,852 1,744 2,613 999 5.7 706
2022 45,675 +1.4 34,507 +1.8 9,400 24,135 721 4,125 426 337 2,418 808 5.3 845
2023 46,011 +0.7 34,790 +0.8 9,425 24,430 687 4,198 241 147 2,609 875 5.7 761
2021 Q2 44,888 +0.2 33,718 +0.9 9,322 23,446 697 4,066 2,164 2,143 2,691 1,024 5.9 658
Q3 45,215 +0.8 33,929 +1.5 9,347 23,606 719 4,161 935 915 2,545 920 5.5 774
Q4 45,518 +1.0 34,374 +1.6 9,415 23,982 727 4,125 835 762 2,341 802 5.1 804
2022 Q1 45,284 +1.6 34,242 +2.0 9,348 23,943 715 4,061 1,033 792 2,417 874 5.3 818
Q2 45,605 +1.6 34,401 +2.0 9,372 24,056 718 4,112 337 324 2,311 777 5.0 864
Q3 45,776 +1.2 34,522 +1.7 9,405 24,133 724 4,159 103 92 2,501 804 5.5 880
Q4 46,035 +1.1 34,864 +1.4 9,475 24,409 730 4,166 229 139 2,443 778 5.3 817
2023 Q1 45,712 +0.9 34,614 +1.1 9,395 24,288 696 4,152 430 153 2,610 900 5.7 773
Q2 45,981 +0.8 34,702 +0.9 9,410 24,352 687 4,209 152 146 2,561 839 5.6 770
Q3 46,080 +0.7 34,762 +0.7 9,421 24,398 686 4,242 128 122 2,647 885 5.7 768
Q4 46,269 +0.5 35,082 +0.6 9,471 24,682 680 4,189 253 166 2,617 874 5.7 732
2024 Q1 45,899 +0.4 834,797 8+0.5 89,367 824,565 8 631 84,153 ... 8 200 2,796 1,000 6.1 704
Q2 946,148 9 +0.4 834,870 8+0.5 89,357 824,645 8 617 84,204 ... 8 223 2,733 939 10 5.9 701
2021 Apr. 44,758 –0.2 33,689 +0.8 9,324 23,427 687 4,039 2,583 2,560 2,771 1,091 6.0 629
May 44,871 +0.3 33,747 +1.3 9,326 23,461 703 4,067 2,342 2,320 2,687 1,020 5.9 654
June 45,034 +0.7 33,802 +1.4 9,324 23,504 716 4,151 1,568 1,548 2,614 961 5.7 693
July 45,094 +0.8 33,731 +1.5 9,304 23,458 715 4,194 1,088 1,068 2,590 956 5.6 744
Aug. 45,158 +0.8 33,994 +1.5 9,358 23,658 722 4,153 857 838 2,578 940 5.6 779
Sep. 45,394 +0.8 34,323 +1.6 9,432 23,903 726 4,123 859 839 2,465 864 5.4 799
Oct. 45,511 +0.8 34,369 +1.5 9,425 23,965 724 4,123 780 762 2,377 814 5.2 809
Nov. 45,567 +1.1 34,449 +1.6 9,423 24,039 739 4,133 767 750 2,317 789 5.1 808
Dec. 45,475 +1.2 34,284 +1.7 9,364 23,980 708 4,112 957 772 2,330 803 5.1 794
2022 Jan. 45,218 +1.5 34,176 +2.0 9,332 23,900 711 4,048 1,123 847 2,462 903 5.4 792
Feb. 45,263 +1.6 34,243 +2.2 9,346 23,939 719 4,049 1,087 803 2,428 884 5.3 822
Mar. 45,370 +1.6 34,334 +2.1 9,369 23,999 719 4,061 888 727 2,362 835 5.1 839
Apr. 45,489 +1.6 34,368 +2.0 9,366 24,037 713 4,091 453 439 2,309 800 5.0 852
May 45,621 +1.7 34,445 +2.1 9,376 24,089 719 4,131 318 305 2,260 771 4.9 865
June 45,705 +1.5 34,445 +1.9 9,376 24,084 724 4,164 241 228 2,363 761 5.2 877
July 45,663 +1.3 34,322 +1.8 9,361 23,988 718 4,176 115 102 2,470 801 5.4 881
Aug. 45,716 +1.2 34,571 +1.7 9,417 24,169 725 4,151 87 76 2,547 827 5.6 887
Sep. 45,948 +1.2 34,899 +1.7 9,499 24,401 733 4,136 108 97 2,486 782 5.4 873
Oct. 46,070 +1.2 34,893 +1.5 9,489 24,414 734 4,161 134 124 2,442 764 5.3 846
Nov. 46,078 +1.1 34,897 +1.3 9,478 24,435 738 4,179 156 147 2,434 770 5.3 823
Dec. 45,957 +1.1 34,705 +1.2 9,414 24,357 704 4,182 397 146 2,454 799 5.4 781
2023 Jan. 45,651 +1.0 34,550 +1.1 9,381 24,240 697 4,138 451 145 2,616 911 5.7 764
Feb. 45,697 +1.0 34,601 +1.0 9,392 24,279 692 4,148 441 157 2,620 910 5.7 778
Mar. 45,789 +0.9 34,679 +1.0 9,412 24,332 692 4,157 398 159 2,594 878 5.7 777
Apr. 45,886 +0.9 34,685 +0.9 9,410 24,342 684 4,188 146 139 2,586 855 5.7 773
May 45,994 +0.8 34,728 +0.8 9,413 24,371 687 4,228 149 142 2,544 829 5.5 767
June 46,062 +0.8 34,709 +0.8 9,404 24,357 690 4,266 162 156 2,555 833 5.5 769
July 46,030 +0.8 34,584 +0.8 9,382 24,261 687 4,279 113 107 2,617 878 5.7 772
Aug. 46,013 +0.6 34,804 +0.7 9,429 24,433 685 4,221 113 107 2,696 910 5.8 771
Sep. 46,196 +0.5 35,089 +0.5 9,500 24,641 684 4,186 158 152 2,627 869 5.7 761
Oct. 46,296 +0.5 35,117 +0.6 9,490 24,686 686 4,181 183 177 2,607 861 5.7 749
Nov. 46,319 +0.5 35,126 +0.7 9,473 24,719 688 4,195 181 174 2,606 865 5.6 733
Dec. 46,193 +0.5 34,915 +0.6 9,401 24,637 648 4,197 395 148 2,637 896 5.7 713
2024 Jan. 45,855 +0.4 34,754 +0.6 9,359 24,528 635 4,138 540 189 2,805 1,006 6.1 699
Feb. 45,883 +0.4 34,770 +0.5 9,359 24,548 625 4,141 485 201 2,814 1,015 6.1 706
Mar. 45,958 +0.4 834,818 8+0.4 89,362 824,598 8 616 84,165 ... 8 210 2,769 977 6.0 707
Apr. 46,052 +0.4 834,874 8+0.5 89,364 824,642 8 619 84,185 ... 8 223 2,750 949 6.0 701
May 46,163 +0.4 834,900 8+0.5 89,357 824,671 8 616 84,217 ... 8 215 2,723 930 10 5.8 702
June 946,228 9 +0.4 834,852 8+0.4 89,338 824,647 8 614 84,252 ... 8 232 2,727 937 5.8 701
July 946,185 9 +0.3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,809 989 6.0 703
Aug. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,872 1,021 6.1 699
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency.  * Annual and quarterly
figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the official figures are
due to rounding.  1 Workplace concept; averages.  2 Monthly figures: end of month.
3 Number within a given month.  4 Mid-month level.  5 Relative to the total civilian
labour force.  6 Excluding government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs,
including jobs located abroad.  7 Statistical break due to late recording of unemployed
persons in the legal category of the Second Book of the Social Security Code (SGB II).8 Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. In 2022 and 2023,
the estimated values for Germany deviated from the final data by a maximum of 0.1%
for employees subject to social contributions, by a maximum of 0.5% for persons
solely in jobs exempt from social contributions, and by a maximum of 61,3% for
cyclically induced short-time work.  9 Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statis-
tical Office.  10 From May 2024, calculated on the basis of new labour force figures.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
71•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
7. Prices
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
of which: Indices of
foreign trade prices
of which:
Total Food  1,2Non-
energy
industrial
goods  1 Energy  1 Services  1Actual
rents
for
housing  1Memo item:
Consumer
price index
(national
concept)Con-
struction
price
indexIndex of
producer
prices of
industrial
products
sold on
the
domestic
market  3Index of
producer
prices of
agri-
cultural
products  3 Exports Imports
Period 2015 = 100 2020 = 100 2021 = 100 2020 = 100 2021=100
Index level
2020 4 105.8 4 110.9 4 104.1 4 99.0 4 106.9 107.6 4 100.0 4 92.0 91.2 100.0 ... ...
2021 4 109.2 4 114.1 4 106.7 4 109.0 4 109.0 109.0 4 103.1 4 100.0 100.0 106.9 100.0 100.0
2022 118.7 126.2 112.7 146.8 112.2 110.8 110.2 116.6 129.8 141.0 113.5 121.8
2023 125.9 140.9 119.1 154.2 117.6 113.1 116.7 126.7 130.1 5 140.8 114.2 113.9
2022 Oct. 123.5 132.2 115.8 164.5 114.3 111.4 113.5 139.3 151.2 115.4 125.3
Nov. 123.5 133.6 116.3 163.5 113.7 111.6 113.7 122.1 135.0 151.8 115.2 121.5
Dec. 122.0 134.6 116.6 143.9 114.8 111.7 113.2 134.2 152.0 115.1 120.1
2023 Jan. 122.6 136.7 116.4 154.8 113.8 112.1 114.3 133.5 5 149.6 115.1 118.7
Feb. 123.8 139.5 117.0 154.9 115.0 112.2 115.2 125.5 132.5 148.6 115.1 117.2
Mar. 125.1 141.3 118.3 155.0 116.1 112.5 116.1 131.1 144.6 115.0 116.1
Apr. 125.8 141.1 119.0 156.1 117.1 112.6 116.6 131.8 141.9 114.6 114.6
May 125.6 141.1 119.3 154.0 116.9 112.8 116.5 126.6 130.4 139.1 114.2 113.2
June 126.1 141.2 119.5 153.7 117.8 113.0 116.8 129.8 141.4 114.0 112.3
July 126.7 141.2 118.8 153.6 119.6 113.2 117.1 128.9 142.5 113.7 111.6
Aug. 127.2 141.0 119.2 156.5 119.8 113.5 117.5 127.1 129.2 142.5 113.7 112.0
Sep. 127.4 141.5 120.1 157.6 119.3 113.6 117.8 129.3 137.0 114.0 113.3
Oct. 127.2 141.6 120.5 154.7 119.1 113.7 117.8 129.1 134.6 114.1 113.4
Nov. 126.3 142.4 120.5 151.6 117.6 113.9 117.3 127.7 128.3 134.9 113.8 112.8
Dec. 126.6 142.4 120.5 148.4 118.7 114.0 117.4 127.3 136.8 113.5 111.7
2024 Jan. 126.4 143.7 119.7 150.2 118.1 114.4 117.6 127.6 137.8 113.6 111.7
Feb. 127.2 143.6 120.3 150.9 119.3 114.6 118.1 129.5 127.1 139.3 113.8 111.5
Mar. 128.0 143.5 120.9 150.5 120.7 114.9 118.6 127.3 140.6 113.9 111.9
Apr. 128.8 144.3 121.1 154.0 121.3 115.1 119.2 127.5 141.6 114.4 112.7
May 129.1 144.0 120.9 152.1 122.4 115.3 119.3 130.4 127.5 143.4 114.4 112.7
June 129.3 144.4 120.8 150.3 123.3 115.5 119.4 127.7 145.9 114.7 113.1
July 130.0 144.6 120.1 150.7 124.9 115.7 119.8 127.9 144.9 114.6 112.6
Aug. 129.8 144.6 120.0 148.5 125.1 115.8 119.7 ... ... ... ... ...
Annual percentage change
2020 4 +0.4 4+ 2.3 4– 0.1 4– 4.5 4+ 1.2 + 1.4 4 +0.5 4+ 1.4 – 1.0 – 3.1 ... ...
2021 4 +3.2 4+ 2.9 4+ 2.5 4+ 10.1 4+ 2.0 + 1.3 4 +3.1 4+ 8.8 + 9.6 + 6.9 ... ...
2022 +8.7 + 10.6 + 5.7 + 34.7 + 2.9 + 1.7 +6.9 +16.6 +29.8 +31.9 +13.5 +21.8
2023 +6.0 + 11.7 + 5.6 + 5.1 + 4.8 + 2.1 +5.9 + 8.7 + 0.2 5– 0.1 + 0.6 – 6.5
2022 Oct. +11.6 + 15.5 + 7.2 + 43.5 + 3.9 + 1.7 +8.8 +31.7 +38.3 +12.0 +18.2
Nov. +11.3 + 16.3 + 7.3 + 40.1 + 3.8 + 1.9 +8.8 +17.3 +26.4 +33.9 +10.9 +12.3
Dec. +9.6 + 16.3 + 7.4 + 25.1 + 4.1 + 1.9 +8.1 +21.4 +32.5 + 9.8 + 9.6
2023 Jan. +9.2 + 16.6 + 7.4 + 25.1 + 3.6 + 2.0 +8.7 +16.4 5+27.8 + 8.1 + 5.3
Feb. +9.3 + 18.0 + 7.2 + 21.6 + 4.4 + 2.0 +8.7 +15.5 +13.9 +22.9 + 6.6 + 3.1
Mar. +7.8 + 18.6 + 7.2 + 6.1 + 5.0 + 2.1 +7.4 + 7.5 + 5.8 + 3.3 – 3.1
Apr. +7.6 + 15.5 + 6.9 + 9.4 + 4.8 + 2.0 +7.2 + 5.2 – 1.3 + 1.7 – 5.6
May +6.3 + 13.6 + 6.2 + 5.0 + 4.4 + 2.0 +6.1 + 8.9 + 2.5 – 2.8 + 0.9 – 7.7
June +6.8 + 12.6 + 6.2 + 4.0 + 6.1 + 2.0 +6.4 + 1.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 8.6
July +6.5 + 10.7 + 5.5 + 3.9 + 6.7 + 2.1 +6.2 – 2.9 + 0.3 – 2.0 –10.8
Aug. +6.4 + 9.2 + 5.5 + 5.3 + 6.8 + 2.2 +6.1 + 6.5 – 7.6 – 1.5 – 3.6 –12.9
Sep. +4.3 + 8.1 + 4.9 – 0.8 + 4.7 + 2.2 +4.5 – 9.1 – 7.7 – 2.6 –11.0
Oct. +3.0 + 7.1 + 4.1 – 6.0 + 4.2 + 2.1 +3.8 – 7.3 –11.0 – 1.1 – 9.5
Nov. +2.3 + 6.6 + 3.6 – 7.3 + 3.4 + 2.1 +3.2 + 4.6 – 5.0 –11.1 – 1.2 – 7.2
Dec. +3.8 + 5.8 + 3.3 + 3.1 + 3.4 + 2.1 +3.7 – 5.1 –10.0 – 1.4 – 7.0
2024 Jan. +3.1 + 5.1 + 2.8 – 3.0 + 3.8 + 2.1 +2.9 – 4.4 – 7.9 – 1.3 – 5.9
Feb. +2.7 + 2.9 + 2.8 – 2.6 + 3.7 + 2.1 +2.5 + 3.2 – 4.1 – 6.3 – 1.1 – 4.9
Mar. +2.3 + 1.6 + 2.2 – 2.9 + 4.0 + 2.1 +2.2 – 2.9 – 2.8 – 1.0 – 3.6
Apr. +2.4 + 2.3 + 1.8 – 1.3 + 3.6 + 2.2 +2.2 – 3.3 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 1.7
May +2.8 + 2.1 + 1.3 – 1.2 + 4.7 + 2.2 +2.4 + 3.0 – 2.2 + 3.1 + 0.2 – 0.4
June +2.5 + 2.3 + 1.1 – 2.2 + 4.7 + 2.2 +2.2 – 1.6 + 3.2 + 0.6 + 0.7
July +2.6 + 2.4 + 1.1 – 1.9 + 4.4 + 2.2 +2.3 – 0.8 + 1.7 + 0.8 + 0.9
Aug. +2.0 + 2.6 + 0.7 – 5.1 + 4.4 + 2.0 +1.9 ... ... ... ... ...
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data
from the Federal Statistical Office.  1 The last data point is at times based on the Bun-
desbank’s own estimates.  2 Including alcoholic beverages and tobacco.  3 Excluding va-lue added tax.  4 Influenced by a temporary reduction of value added tax between July
and December 2020.  5 From January 2023 onwards, provisional figures.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
72•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
8. Households' income *
Gross wages and
salaries  1Net wages and
salaries  2Monetary social
benefits received  3 Mass income  4 Disposable income  5 Saving  6Saving
ratio  7
Period € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
changeAs
percentage
2016 1,372.9 4.2 931.4 4.0 432.9 4.0 1,364.2 4.0 1,887.1 2.9 187.8 2.3 10.0
2017 1,435.3 4.5 971.8 4.3 447.9 3.5 1,419.7 4.1 1,955.0 3.6 201.2 7.2 10.3
2018 1,506.6 5.0 1,019.6 4.9 461.5 3.0 1,481.2 4.3 2,028.6 3.8 220.1 9.4 10.8
2019 1,572.6 4.4 1,069.5 4.9 479.2 3.8 1,548.7 4.6 2,080.4 2.6 215.3 – 2.2 10.3
2020 1,561.7 – 0.7 1,066.1 – 0.3 521.5 8.8 1,587.6 2.5 2,080.5 0.0 331.7 54.1 15.9
2021 1,620.5 3.8 1,111.3 4.2 531.5 1.9 1,642.8 3.5 2,144.2 3.1 303.3 – 8.6 14.1
2022 1,718.7 6.1 1,174.8 5.7 539.6 1.5 1,714.4 4.4 2,312.4 7.8 237.3 –21.8 10.3
2023 1,846.0 7.4 1,286.5 9.5 571.4 5.9 1,857.9 8.4 2,462.1 6.5 256.5 8.1 10.4
2023 Q1 432.2 7.4 301.4 9.6 143.0 6.5 444.4 8.6 603.0 7.6 74.1 – 0.3 12.3
Q2 445.1 7.8 303.3 10.0 139.9 6.2 443.2 8.8 609.1 8.0 61.9 16.2 10.2
Q3 457.0 7.7 323.9 9.3 145.0 5.0 469.0 7.9 619.9 5.8 58.1 12.5 9.4
Q4 511.7 6.9 357.9 9.2 143.5 6.0 501.3 8.2 630.2 4.8 62.3 7.5 9.9
2024 Q1 461.1 6.7 323.7 7.4 151.3 5.8 475.0 6.9 635.2 5.3 86.7 17.0 13.7
Q2 469.9 5.6 321.1 5.8 148.4 6.1 469.5 5.9 632.3 3.8 68.5 10.7 10.8
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2024.  * Households in-
cluding non-profit institutions serving households.  1 Residence concept.  2 After
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees'
contributions to the social security funds.  3 Social security benefits in cash from the
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, pension
payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social
benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges.  4 Net wages and salaries plusmonetary social benefits received.  5 Mass income plus operating surplus, mixed
income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of non-profit
institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax and consumption-related
taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in claims on company
pension funds.  6 Including the increase in claims on company pension funds.  7 Saving
as a percentage of disposable income.
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
Index of negotiated wages  1
On a monthly basis
On an hourly basis TotalTotal excluding
one-off payments Basic pay rates  2Memo item:
Wages and salaries
per employee  3
Period 2020=100Annual
percentage
change 2020=100Annual
percentage
change 2020=100Annual
percentage
change 2020=100Annual
percentage
change 2020=100Annual
percentage
change
2016 90.2 2.2 90.2 2.2 90.5 2.2 90.7 2.3 91.5 2.6
2017 92.3 2.3 92.2 2.3 92.6 2.3 92.9 2.4 94.0 2.8
2018 95.0 3.0 95.0 3.0 95.2 2.8 95.5 2.8 97.2 3.3
2019 97.8 3.0 97.8 3.0 98.0 2.9 98.0 2.6 100.2 3.1
2020 100.0 2.2 100.0 2.2 100.0 2.1 100.0 2.1 100.0 – 0.2
2021 101.5 1.5 101.5 1.5 101.6 1.6 101.5 1.5 103.3 3.3
2022 104.2 2.6 104.1 2.6 103.8 2.2 103.6 2.0 107.8 4.3
2023 108.3 4.0 108.3 4.0 106.6 2.7 106.3 2.6 114.8 6.4
2023 Q1 101.6 3.8 101.6 3.8 98.9 2.5 105.2 2.6 108.2 6.2
Q2 100.9 3.9 100.8 3.9 99.2 2.5 106.0 2.4 110.8 6.7
Q3 111.8 4.7 111.7 4.7 110.5 3.2 106.8 3.0 113.6 6.8
Q4 119.1 3.6 119.0 3.6 118.0 2.5 107.1 2.5 126.4 6.2
2024 Q1 108.0 6.2 107.9 6.2 101.9 3.1 108.4 3.0 114.8 6.1
Q2 104.0 3.1 103.9 3.1 103.4 4.3 110.5 4.2 116.4 5.1
2024 Jan. 103.5 1.1 103.4 1.1 100.6 2.5 107.8 2.5 . .
Feb. 110.0 5.9 110.0 5.9 102.9 2.6 107.9 2.5 . .
Mar. 110.4 11.8 110.3 11.8 102.2 4.1 109.6 4.2 . .
Apr. 103.9 4.8 103.9 4.8 103.1 4.0 109.8 3.9 . .
May 104.2 4.4 104.1 4.4 103.8 4.9 110.8 4.7 . .
June 103.8 0.2 103.8 0.2 103.4 4.0 110.9 4.1 . .
July 147.5 10.6 147.4 10.6 138.3 4.8 112.2 5.1 . .
1 Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports.  2 Excluding
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such as
annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13th monthly salary payment) andretirement provisions).  3 Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August
2024.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
73•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
End of year/half
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which: of which: Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which:
PeriodTotal
assetsNon-
current
assetsIntangible
assetsTangible
assetsFinancial
assetsCurrent
assetsInven-
toriesTrade
receiv-
ables Cash  1 Equity Total Totalof which:
Financial
debt TotalFinancial
debtTrade
payables
Total (€ billion)
2020 2,850.0 1,797.3 607.6 733.1 335.1 1,052.7 243.6 225.9 240.5 811.5 2,038.5 1,181.5 746.4 857.0 304.4 196.1
2021 3,292.0 1,971.6 680.1 773.8 384.8 1,320.4 272.1 261.5 261.5 994.4 2,297.6 1,206.9 772.1 1,090.7 321.4 236.7
2022 3,431.6 2,057.0 713.5 804.3 410.1 1,374.6 326.2 268.3 244.3 1,133.2 2,298.4 1,195.7 760.2 1,102.8 331.8 273.3
p 2023 3,320.5 2,038.7 699.2 823.2 374.4 1,281.8 325.2 259.9 245.6 1,145.4 2,175.1 1,146.3 771.1 1,028.8 347.3 261.7
2022 H1 3,593.6 2,108.1 719.1 796.3 447.4 1,485.5 322.4 284.8 225.4 1,075.4 2,518.2 1,237.0 789.5 1,281.2 313.7 260.7
H2 3,431.6 2,057.0 713.5 804.3 410.1 1,374.6 326.2 268.3 244.3 1,133.2 2,298.4 1,195.7 760.2 1,102.8 331.8 273.3
2023 H1 3,322.4 2,009.5 699.5 799.0 373.5 1,312.9 343.9 263.7 234.3 1,134.0 2,188.3 1,130.8 752.5 1,057.5 327.4 259.9
pH2 3,320.5 2,038.7 699.2 823.2 374.4 1,281.8 325.2 259.9 245.6 1,145.4 2,175.1 1,146.3 771.1 1,028.8 347.3 261.7
As a percentage of total assets
2020 100.0 63.1 21.3 25.7 11.8 36.9 8.6 7.9 8.4 28.5 71.5 41.5 26.2 30.1 10.7 6.9
2021 100.0 59.9 20.7 23.5 11.7 40.1 8.3 7.9 7.9 30.2 69.8 36.7 23.5 33.1 9.8 7.2
2022 100.0 59.9 20.8 23.4 12.0 40.1 9.5 7.8 7.1 33.0 67.0 34.8 22.2 32.1 9.7 8.0
p 2023 100.0 61.4 21.1 24.8 11.3 38.6 9.8 7.8 7.4 34.5 65.5 34.5 23.2 31.0 10.5 7.9
2022 H1 100.0 58.7 20.0 22.2 12.5 41.3 9.0 7.9 6.3 29.9 70.1 34.4 22.0 35.7 8.7 7.3
H2 100.0 59.9 20.8 23.4 12.0 40.1 9.5 7.8 7.1 33.0 67.0 34.8 22.2 32.1 9.7 8.0
2023 H1 100.0 60.5 21.1 24.1 11.2 39.5 10.4 7.9 7.1 34.1 65.9 34.0 22.7 31.8 9.9 7.8
pH2 100.0 61.4 21.1 24.8 11.3 38.6 9.8 7.8 7.4 34.5 65.5 34.5 23.2 31.0 10.5 7.9
Groups with a focus on the production sector (€ billion) 2
2020 2,265.0 1,354.9 399.1 543.5 320.0 910.1 228.7 179.5 187.9 636.3 1,628.8 904.7 537.0 724.0 267.3 149.8
2021 2,626.3 1,479.3 441.7 573.9 363.5 1,147.0 254.4 206.3 204.2 764.7 1,861.6 918.5 548.5 943.2 285.9 184.0
2022 2,730.8 1,538.3 461.5 591.7 388.3 1,192.4 307.7 209.1 186.5 879.7 1,851.1 912.7 534.3 938.4 291.2 215.2
p 2023 2,620.2 1,512.9 446.6 604.5 352.1 1,107.3 305.2 202.2 203.4 888.8 1,731.4 859.8 544.6 871.6 308.2 206.6
2022 H1 2,898.3 1,582.5 462.4 583.8 422.6 1,315.9 303.6 222.5 177.2 830.9 2,067.4 945.2 558.2 1,122.2 272.8 207.6
H2 2,730.8 1,538.3 461.5 591.7 388.3 1,192.4 307.7 209.1 186.5 879.7 1,851.1 912.7 534.3 938.4 291.2 215.2
2023 H1 2,651.0 1,504.1 460.3 588.8 348.8 1,146.8 326.4 210.9 183.6 892.6 1,758.4 854.6 532.3 903.8 282.9 210.1
pH2 2,620.2 1,512.9 446.6 604.5 352.1 1,107.3 305.2 202.2 203.4 888.8 1,731.4 859.8 544.6 871.6 308.2 206.6
As a percentage of total assets
2020 100.0 59.8 17.6 24.0 14.1 40.2 10.1 7.9 8.3 28.1 71.9 39.9 23.7 32.0 11.8 6.6
2021 100.0 56.3 16.8 21.9 13.8 43.7 9.7 7.9 7.8 29.1 70.9 35.0 20.9 35.9 10.9 7.0
2022 100.0 56.3 16.9 21.7 14.2 43.7 11.3 7.7 6.8 32.2 67.8 33.4 19.6 34.4 10.7 7.9
p 2023 100.0 57.7 17.0 23.1 13.4 42.3 11.7 7.7 7.8 33.9 66.1 32.8 20.8 33.3 11.8 7.9
2022 H1 100.0 54.6 16.0 20.1 14.6 45.4 10.5 7.7 6.1 28.7 71.3 32.6 19.3 38.7 9.4 7.2
H2 100.0 56.3 16.9 21.7 14.2 43.7 11.3 7.7 6.8 32.2 67.8 33.4 19.6 34.4 10.7 7.9
2023 H1 100.0 56.7 17.4 22.2 13.2 43.3 12.3 8.0 6.9 33.7 66.3 32.2 20.1 34.1 10.7 7.9
pH2 100.0 57.7 17.0 23.1 13.4 42.3 11.7 7.7 7.8 33.9 66.1 32.8 20.8 33.3 11.8 7.9
Groups with a focus on the services sector (€ billion)  
2020 585.0 442.4 208.5 189.6 15.1 142.6 14.9 46.4 52.6 175.3 409.7 276.7 209.4 133.0 37.1 46.3
2021 665.7 492.2 238.5 200.0 21.3 173.5 17.7 55.2 57.3 229.7 436.0 288.4 223.6 147.6 35.5 52.6
2022 700.9 518.7 251.9 212.5 21.8 182.2 18.5 59.1 57.8 253.5 447.3 283.0 225.9 164.3 40.7 58.1
p 2023 700.3 525.8 252.6 218.7 22.3 174.5 20.0 57.7 42.2 256.6 443.7 286.5 226.5 157.2 39.1 55.2
2022 H1 695.3 525.7 256.7 212.5 24.8 169.6 18.8 62.2 48.2 244.5 450.8 291.8 231.4 159.0 40.9 53.1
H2 700.9 518.7 251.9 212.5 21.8 182.2 18.5 59.1 57.8 253.5 447.3 283.0 225.9 164.3 40.7 58.1
2023 H1 671.4 505.4 239.2 210.2 24.7 166.0 17.4 52.9 50.7 241.5 429.9 276.2 220.1 153.8 44.6 49.9
pH2 700.3 525.8 252.6 218.7 22.3 174.5 20.0 57.7 42.2 256.6 443.7 286.5 226.5 157.2 39.1 55.2
As a percentage of total assets
2020 100.0 75.6 35.6 32.4 2.6 24.4 2.6 7.9 9.0 30.0 70.0 47.3 35.8 22.7 6.3 7.9
2021 100.0 73.9 35.8 30.0 3.2 26.1 2.7 8.3 8.6 34.5 65.5 43.3 33.6 22.2 5.3 7.9
2022 100.0 74.0 36.0 30.3 3.1 26.0 2.6 8.4 8.3 36.2 63.8 40.4 32.2 23.5 5.8 8.3
p 2023 100.0 75.1 36.1 31.2 3.2 24.9 2.9 8.2 6.0 36.6 63.4 40.9 32.3 22.4 5.6 7.9
2022 H1 100.0 75.6 36.9 30.6 3.6 24.4 2.7 9.0 6.9 35.2 64.8 42.0 33.3 22.9 5.9 7.6
H2 100.0 74.0 36.0 30.3 3.1 26.0 2.6 8.4 8.3 36.2 63.8 40.4 32.2 23.5 5.8 8.3
2023 H1 100.0 75.3 35.6 31.3 3.7 24.7 2.6 7.9 7.6 36.0 64.0 41.1 32.8 22.9 6.6 7.4
pH2 100.0 75.1 36.1 31.2 3.2 24.9 2.9 8.2 6.0 36.6 63.4 40.9 32.3 22.4 5.6 7.9
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Including cash equivalents.  2 Includ-
ing groups in agriculture and forestry.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
74•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
EBITDA  1
as a percentage of revenuesEBIT  2
as a percentage of revenues
Distribution  3 Distribution  3
Revenues EBITDA  1Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartile EBIT  2Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartile
Period € billion  4Annual
per-
centage
change  5€ billion  4Annual
per-
centage
change  5%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  5% % % € billion  4Annual
per-
centage
change  5%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  5% % %
Total
2016 1,624.3 – 0.4 214.4 7.8 13.2 1.0 6.7 11.4 17.9 111.7 9.0 6.9 0.5 2.6 6.7 12.0
2017 1,719.3 5.1 243.4 14.6 14.2 1.2 7.0 11.0 18.0 141.9 33.3 8.3 1.8 2.5 6.8 12.1
6 2018 1,706.8 0.7 232.8 – 0.9 13.6 – 0.2 6.1 10.6 17.8 129.2 – 6.3 7.6 – 0.6 2.1 6.5 11.9
2019 1,764.6 2.6 233.6 0.4 13.2 – 0.3 6.9 12.2 19.2 105.5 – 17.9 6.0 – 1.5 1.6 5.8 11.8
2020 1,632.8 – 8.8 213.6 – 7.7 13.1 0.2 6.5 11.5 17.9 52.1 – 41.0 3.2 – 2.1 – 0.8 4.9 10.5
2021 1,994.7 20.4 297.7 37.7 14.9 1.9 7.8 13.4 19.9 161.5 212.6 8.1 5.0 2.9 8.2 12.2
2022 2,431.3 20.8 324.8 7.8 13.4 – 1.6 6.4 11.8 18.4 170.0 3.5 7.0 – 1.2 1.6 6.6 12.4
p 2023 2,238.3 – 7.7 323.6 0.4 14.5 1.2 6.1 12.2 17.9 170.0 0.9 7.6 0.7 1.8 6.6 11.5
2019 H1 861.3 2.7 112.3 – 4.0 13.0 – 0.9 6.5 11.8 18.6 53.4 – 23.3 6.2 – 2.1 1.5 5.7 11.7
H2 903.7 2.4 121.3 4.8 13.4 0.3 6.6 11.8 20.0 52.0 – 11.4 5.8 – 0.9 0.8 6.1 12.5
2020 H1 744.5 – 14.4 78.2 – 34.1 10.5 – 3.0 4.8 9.9 16.7 7.9 – 88.0 1.1 – 5.3 – 2.1 3.5 8.8
H2 888.4 – 3.3 135.4 17.1 15.2 2.8 7.6 13.2 19.8 44.2 8.6 5.0 0.7 1.7 6.5 11.6
2021 H1 920.0 20.3 151.5 87.2 16.5 5.9 7.4 12.6 19.5 84.5 . 9.2 8.3 2.3 7.8 12.2
H2 1,075.6 20.4 146.4 8.1 13.6 – 1.6 7.9 13.2 20.8 77.0 73.1 7.2 2.2 2.9 7.7 13.4
2022 H1 1,149.7 23.5 161.0 4.8 14.0 – 2.5 6.1 11.5 18.4 84.9 – 1.6 7.4 – 1.9 1.6 6.4 11.8
H2 1,283.3 18.5 163.9 11.0 12.8 – 0.9 5.9 11.6 18.9 85.2 9.1 6.6 – 0.6 1.7 6.7 12.9
2023 H1 1,112.0 – 3.0 172.0 7.8 15.5 1.6 6.4 10.8 17.5 98.1 16.9 8.8 1.5 1.2 6.5 10.8
pH2 1,127.6 – 12.0 151.7 – 6.8 13.5 0.8 6.2 12.5 19.8 71.9 – 15.0 6.4 – 0.2 1.2 7.0 13.0
Groups with a focus on the production sector 7
2016 1,295.9 – 0.8 161.9 6.3 12.5 0.8 6.5 10.6 16.0 84.8 4.2 6.5 0.3 2.8 6.3 10.5
2017 1,395.9 5.5 187.5 16.6 13.4 1.3 7.1 11.0 15.8 112.5 40.6 8.1 2.0 3.2 6.7 10.4
6 2018 1,367.7 1.0 175.7 – 1.5 12.9 – 0.3 6.9 10.7 16.0 100.7 – 7.1 7.4 – 0.6 2.8 6.9 11.4
2019 1,410.9 2.0 168.1 – 4.4 11.9 – 0.8 6.9 11.3 16.6 76.3 – 23.8 5.4 – 1.8 1.4 5.7 10.1
2020 1,285.2 – 9.4 143.6 – 8.6 11.2 0.1 5.7 10.6 16.5 29.1 – 48.1 2.3 – 2.3 – 0.7 4.3 9.8
2021 1,585.8 22.4 208.9 45.9 13.2 2.1 7.9 12.8 17.9 118.6 325.8 7.5 5.4 2.8 7.8 11.1
2022 1,957.4 21.7 222.9 4.7 11.4 – 1.8 6.9 11.3 16.4 116.3 – 4.7 5.9 – 1.6 1.8 6.6 10.7
p 2023 1,784.0 – 8.2 233.7 5.7 13.1 1.7 7.0 11.4 16.1 124.1 7.6 7.0 1.0 2.2 6.6 11.4
2019 H1 689.9 2.4 83.3 – 8.8 12.1 – 1.5 7.1 10.9 16.1 41.9 – 26.8 6.1 – 2.4 1.8 6.0 9.5
H2 721.0 1.7 84.8 0.3 11.8 – 0.2 6.1 10.8 16.9 34.4 – 19.7 4.8 – 1.3 0.6 5.2 11.1
2020 H1 580.6 – 16.0 49.0 – 42.4 8.4 – 3.8 4.4 8.8 14.9 0.2 – 101.7 0.0 – 6.2 – 2.1 3.1 7.8
H2 704.6 – 3.0 94.6 25.4 13.4 3.4 7.0 12.1 18.6 28.9 19.6 4.1 1.1 0.3 6.0 10.4
2021 H1 731.9 24.0 111.2 126.9 15.2 6.9 8.2 12.6 18.6 66.7 . 9.1 9.3 2.9 7.9 12.1
H2 854.2 21.1 97.7 3.8 11.4 – 1.9 7.8 12.3 17.5 51.9 80.8 6.1 2.0 2.6 7.0 11.5
2022 H1 923.4 23.8 110.9 – 2.5 12.0 – 3.3 7.7 11.5 16.3 59.0 – 14.2 6.4 – 2.8 2.3 6.4 10.4
H2 1,035.8 19.9 112.2 13.1 10.8 – 0.7 5.9 10.8 16.7 57.4 7.7 5.5 – 0.6 1.3 6.5 11.4
2023 H1 894.9 – 2.9 129.0 16.7 14.4 2.4 7.1 11.7 16.3 76.7 30.5 8.6 2.2 2.1 6.7 10.7
pH2 890.0 – 13.0 104.9 – 5.0 11.8 1.0 6.5 12.4 17.4 47.5 – 16.0 5.3 – 0.2 1.8 6.6 12.0
Groups with a focus on the services sector
2016 328.4 1.3 52.5 12.8 16.0 1.6 6.8 13.4 25.1 26.9 24.4 8.2 1.5 2.3 8.2 15.3
2017 323.4 3.5 55.9 8.3 17.3 0.8 6.8 11.5 23.0 29.4 11.4 9.1 0.6 2.1 7.2 15.1
6 2018 339.2 – 0.6 57.1 1.3 16.8 0.3 5.5 10.5 24.7 28.5 – 3.5 8.4 – 0.3 1.4 5.8 16.6
2019 353.7 4.8 65.4 15.2 18.5 1.7 6.9 13.7 24.5 29.2 2.8 8.3 – 0.2 2.4 6.2 16.2
2020 347.6 – 6.1 70.0 – 5.4 20.1 0.1 6.9 13.3 22.1 23.0 – 22.1 6.6 – 1.4 – 1.2 6.5 12.2
2021 408.9 13.0 88.8 21.6 21.7 1.6 7.6 15.0 24.0 42.8 79.7 10.5 3.9 3.0 9.2 15.6
2022 473.9 17.4 101.9 15.3 21.5 – 0.4 5.2 13.1 22.8 53.8 26.4 11.3 0.8 1.0 6.9 14.4
p 2023 454.4 – 5.6 89.9 – 11.2 19.8 – 1.3 5.6 12.9 22.2 45.8 – 13.7 10.1 – 1.0 1.6 6.8 12.9
2019 H1 171.4 4.0 29.0 13.1 16.9 1.4 5.7 12.3 24.4 11.6 – 7.5 6.7 – 0.9 0.0 4.9 14.5
H2 182.7 5.5 36.5 16.9 20.0 1.9 7.1 15.1 24.4 17.7 10.9 9.7 0.5 1.8 8.2 16.3
2020 H1 163.9 – 8.1 29.2 – 9.4 17.8 – 0.3 5.6 10.8 21.2 7.7 – 36.4 4.7 – 2.1 – 2.2 4.3 10.9
H2 183.8 – 4.2 40.8 – 2.2 22.2 0.4 8.9 14.7 23.3 15.3 – 12.8 8.3 – 0.9 2.6 7.5 13.3
2021 H1 188.1 7.7 40.3 26.1 21.5 3.1 6.9 12.6 24.5 17.8 119.9 9.5 4.8 0.9 6.9 13.6
H2 221.4 17.9 48.7 18.2 22.0 0.1 9.4 16.5 24.7 25.1 59.1 11.3 3.0 3.8 9.5 17.7
2022 H1 226.3 22.0 50.1 25.3 22.2 0.6 4.6 11.6 20.9 25.9 46.4 11.5 1.9 – 0.5 6.3 13.5
H2 247.6 13.4 51.8 7.0 20.9 – 1.3 5.2 14.1 24.0 27.8 12.1 11.2 – 0.1 2.2 7.5 15.4
2023 H1 217.1 – 3.6 43.1 – 11.8 19.8 – 1.9 4.7 9.6 19.2 21.4 – 14.4 9.9 – 1.3 – 2.2 4.2 12.0
pH2 237.6 – 7.5 46.8 – 10.7 19.7 – 0.7 5.9 14.4 23.3 24.4 – 13.0 10.3 – 0.7 0.9 7.3 16.1
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-
cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Earnings before interest, taxes, de-
preciation and amortisation.  2 Earnings before interest and taxes.  3 Quantile data are
based on the groups' unweighted return on sales.  4 Annual figures do not alwaysmatch the sum of the two half-year figures. See Quality report on consolidated financial
statement statistics, p. 3.  5 Adjusted for substantial changes in the basis of con-
solidation of large groups and in the reporting sample. See Quality report on consolid-
ated financial statement statistics, p. 6.  6 From 2018 onwards: significant changes in
IFRS standards, impairing comparability with previous periods.  7 Including groups in
agriculture and forestry.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
75•
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
€ million
2023 2024 2024
Item 2021 2022 2023 Q4 Q1 Q2 April  r May  r June  p
I.Current Account +310,699 –42,740 +229,722 +83,491 +87,918 +105,371 +32,676 +10,349 +52,366
1.Goods
Receipts 2,502,629 2,958,629 2,899,575 705,860 726,365 717,851 253,262 249,723 244,916
Expenditure  2,227,466 3,049,828 2,650,915 634,025 650,043 616,054 220,899 216,340 205,143
Balance +275,164 –91,199 +248,660 +71,835 +76,321 +101,796 +32,363 +33,383 +39,772
2.Services
Receipts 1,066,641 1,309,512 1,344,088 350,739 349,624 335,307 114,322 117,029 125,037
Expenditure  967,603 1,152,235 1,223,616 302,247 332,343 312,752 101,861 100,659 107,722
Balance +99,038 +157,277 +120,473 +48,493 +17,281 +22,555 +12,461 +16,370 +17,316
3.Primary income
Receipts 888,282 1,072,541 1,213,011 311,813 319,231 289,292 105,660 109,327 119,701
Expenditure  785,012 1,008,462 1,184,327 305,664 283,143 266,362 106,616 138,699 111,734
Balance +103,271 +64,080 +28,683 + 6,150 +36,087 +22,930 – 956 –29,372 + 7,967
4.Secondary income
Receipts 158,408 168,040 178,252 38,985 50,291 42,669 15,680 16,348 16,252
Expenditure  325,182 340,939 346,346 81,973 92,064 84,580 26,871 26,380 28,941
Balance –166,773 –172,898 –168,094 –42,987 –41,772 –41,910 –11,191 –10,032 –12,689
II.Capital account +48,516 +147,850 +37,316 +10,449 +20,891 –11,709 – 438 + 1,472 + 4,809
III.Financial account  1 +369,865 +52,136 +324,887 +94,204 +120,332 +112,005 +13,276 +30,355 +86,628
1.Direct investment +421,009 +289,854 + 6,077 –10,320 – 7,849 +68,288 +32,599 +18,015 +31,207
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  +370,949 +13,111 –320,099 + 4,440 –308,053 +118,290 +25,581 +22,019 + 1,639
By non-resident units of
the euro area  –50,060 –276,742 –326,176 +14,760 –300,205 +50,002 – 7,019 + 4,004 –29,568
2.Portfolio investment +241,851 –249,580 –92,887 –12,459 –40,253 –15,581 –22,184 – 146 –43,578
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  +790,793 –189,611 +432,297 +98,534 +44,038 +174,417 +23,063 +63,516 +73,992
Equity and
investment fund shares +362,282 –175,934 +49,415 – 4,257 – 8,043 +37,905 +13,711 + 3,717 +44,129
Short-term
debt securities  +119,102 –107,782 +96,770 +32,174 +41,582 +12,080 – 3,250 +21,248 + 6,417
Long-term
debt securities  +309,409 +94,104 +286,111 +70,617 +10,499 +124,432 +12,602 +38,552 +23,446
By non-resident units of 
the euro area  +548,942 +59,969 +525,184 +110,993 +84,291 +189,999 +45,247 +63,663 +117,569
Equity and
investment fund shares +646,900 +38,541 +158,010 +26,598 +84,410 +22,644 +36,252 +38,166 +56,510
Short-term
debt securities  +44,452 –66,303 –11,743 + 3,829 –32,242 –29,298 –44,628 –14,862 +38,032
Long-term
debt securities  –142,410 +87,731 +378,917 +80,566 +32,122 +196,653 +53,623 +40,359 +23,027
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options +56,314 +66,675 +17,408 – 1,097 +22,979 +11,449 + 6,592 – 2,759 – 1,502
4.Other investment –479,679 –72,688 +406,739 +120,255 +139,063 +46,695 – 4,538 +13,606 +99,194
Eurosystem –443,466 +172,310 +318,620 +55,540 +17,852 +76,666 –11,539 –22,097 +14,381
General government –72,491 –48,301 – 3,592 – 2,590 –10,474 + 10 – 1,453 + 1,859 + 1,549
MFIs  2 –117,135 –301,253 +160,317 +45,755 +149,223 +37,370 + 1,022 +51,545 +78,040
Enterprises and households +153,413 +104,556 –68,606 +21,550 –17,538 –67,352 + 8,244 –23,477 + 5,225
5.Reserve assets +130,369 +17,876 –12,450 – 2,175 + 6,390 + 1,155 + 806 + 1,639 + 1,306
IV.Net errors and omissions +10,650 –52,974 +57,848 + 264 +11,523 +18,343 –18,962 +18,534 +29,452
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Increase: + / decrease: -.2 Excluding the Eurosystem.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
76•
XII. External sector
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Current Account Financial account  3
Goods 
Zeit Total Totalof which: 
Supplementary
trade items  1 ServicesPrimary
incomeSecondary
incomeBalance of
capital
account  2 Totalof which: 
Reserve
assetsErrors
and
omissions  4
r 2009 + 144,787 + 136,636 – 10,761 – 16,962 + 55,894 – 30,781 – 1,798 + 111,873 + 8,648 – 31,117
r 2010 + 150,210 + 159,328 – 8,801 – 25,147 + 52,346 – 36,317 + 19 + 73,036 + 1,613 – 77,192
r 2011 + 172,827 + 164,171 – 8,902 – 30,158 + 70,336 – 31,523 – 1,070 + 101,101 + 2,836 – 70,657
r 2012 + 201,277 + 200,916 – 10,420 – 31,425 + 67,297 – 35,511 – 2,167 + 131,252 + 1,297 – 67,858
r 2013 + 192,346 + 199,951 – 17,770 – 34,257 + 66,870 – 40,218 – 2,970 + 200,883 + 838 + 11,507
r 2014 + 215,932 + 218,515 – 15,863 – 22,941 + 61,801 – 41,443 + 336 + 231,400 – 2,564 + 15,132
r 2015 + 250,088 + 245,054 – 18,813 – 16,236 + 60,040 – 38,770 – 1,769 + 227,420 – 2,213 – 20,899
r 2016 + 284,662 + 250,397 – 21,830 – 18,346 + 90,869 – 38,259 – 1,345 + 269,282 + 1,686 – 14,034
r 2017 + 268,729 + 257,041 – 12,757 – 21,212 + 83,864 – 50,964 – 6,479 + 274,766 – 1,269 + 12,515
r 2018 + 289,187 + 218,739 – 27,726 – 14,010 + 134,180 – 49,722 – 3,602 + 261,115 + 392 – 24,470
r 2019 + 278,477 + 213,201 – 39,862 – 14,443 + 130,094 – 50,375 – 4,907 + 200,831 – 544 – 72,739
r 2020 + 218,031 + 177,742 – 21,461 + 6,633 + 87,061 – 53,406 – 10,520 + 168,954 – 51 – 38,557
r 2021 + 254,580 + 188,036 – 5,970 + 1,613 + 124,430 – 59,499 – 3,463 + 206,797 + 31,892 – 44,320
r 2022 + 174,507 + 134,785 + 18,630 – 35,984 + 143,193 – 67,486 – 20,290 + 199,405 + 4,426 + 45,188
r 2023 + 248,696 + 231,085 – 33,721 – 64,577 + 146,423 – 64,234 – 26,636 + 250,153 + 884 + 28,094
r 2021 Q3 + 56,773 + 45,651 – 4,455 – 6,612 + 33,936 – 16,202 + 1,755 + 14,885 + 31,199 – 43,642
r Q4 + 63,458 + 39,847 + 2,546 – 2,883 + 43,025 – 16,531 + 230 + 53,018 + 250 – 10,669
r 2022 Q1 + 57,805 + 37,750 + 5,928 + 723 + 36,785 – 17,453 – 3,787 + 71,950 + 2,200 + 17,932
r Q2 + 28,650 + 30,261 + 8,443 – 6,455 + 18,032 – 13,188 – 4,516 + 61,543 + 597 + 37,410
r Q3 + 31,130 + 31,578 + 7,336 – 22,381 + 39,388 – 17,455 – 6,442 – 19,471 + 784 – 44,159
r Q4 + 56,921 + 35,196 – 3,078 – 7,871 + 48,987 – 19,391 – 5,544 + 85,382 + 845 + 34,005
r 2023 Q1 + 65,256 + 55,177 – 7,384 – 9,541 + 38,396 – 18,776 – 13,931 + 81,336 + 224 + 30,011
r Q2 + 47,047 + 55,560 – 5,974 – 17,082 + 18,793 – 10,225 – 4,074 + 29,749 + 1,096 – 13,223
r Q3 + 59,564 + 58,181 – 9,154 – 25,066 + 42,254 – 15,805 – 3,906 + 46,047 – 790 – 9,611
r Q4 + 76,829 + 62,166 – 11,209 – 12,889 + 46,979 – 19,428 – 4,725 + 93,021 + 355 + 20,918
r 2024 Q1 + 78,220 + 72,365 – 8,065 – 12,166 + 37,078 – 19,058 – 8,679 + 46,880 + 378 – 22,660
r Q2 + 62,280 + 71,409 – 9,870 – 20,366 + 20,480 – 9,242 – 773 + 45,095 + 746 – 16,412
r 2022 Feb. + 22,943 + 16,834 + 2,555 + 1,204 + 10,471 – 5,565 – 1,629 + 46,682 + 1,161 + 25,368
r Mar. + 20,512 + 13,763 + 2,355 – 1,333 + 13,324 – 5,241 – 795 – 2,108 + 730 – 21,826
r Apr. + 12,136 + 7,277 + 3,565 – 1,276 + 11,514 – 5,379 – 1,383 + 19,368 + 83 + 8,614
r May + 4,284 + 10,832 + 3,754 – 2,148 – 2,994 – 1,406 – 2,536 + 2,213 + 161 + 466
r June + 12,230 + 12,152 + 1,124 – 3,031 + 9,511 – 6,403 – 598 + 39,962 + 353 + 28,330
r July + 9,969 + 10,616 + 1,904 – 6,046 + 12,200 – 6,800 – 3,180 – 21,182 – 484 – 27,971
r Aug. + 6,312 + 8,024 + 4,079 – 9,647 + 13,948 – 6,012 – 1,252 + 23,448 + 81 + 18,389
r Sep. + 14,849 + 12,938 + 1,353 – 6,687 + 13,240 – 4,643 – 2,010 – 21,737 + 1,187 – 34,576
r Oct. + 10,678 + 7,214 – 206 – 5,692 + 14,682 – 5,527 – 1,623 + 43,079 + 672 + 34,024
r Nov. + 21,021 + 13,925 – 2,083 – 2,170 + 15,326 – 6,060 – 2,080 – 3,629 + 425 – 22,569
r Dec. + 25,223 + 14,057 – 788 – 10 + 18,979 – 7,803 – 1,842 + 45,932 – 252 + 22,550
r 2023 Jan. + 15,268 + 11,319 – 1,868 – 1,953 + 13,078 – 7,176 – 5,965 – 3,226 – 341 – 12,529
r Feb. + 21,743 + 19,008 – 1,822 – 3,185 + 11,062 – 5,143 – 1,918 + 29,475 + 143 + 9,649
r Mar. + 28,245 + 24,849 – 3,694 – 4,403 + 14,256 – 6,457 – 6,048 + 55,087 + 423 + 32,890
r Apr. + 19,226 + 15,878 – 1,630 – 3,807 + 12,170 – 5,014 – 343 – 32,083 + 88 – 50,966
r May + 6,891 + 17,485 – 696 – 6,417 – 3,771 – 406 – 2,415 + 5,084 + 45 + 608
r June + 20,929 + 22,197 – 3,648 – 6,858 + 10,395 – 4,805 – 1,316 + 56,748 + 962 + 37,135
r July + 16,964 + 18,576 – 4,531 – 8,018 + 12,254 – 5,847 – 4,669 + 2,762 – 118 – 9,533
r Aug. + 18,930 + 18,809 – 1,077 – 10,616 + 15,803 – 5,066 – 691 + 38,044 – 107 + 19,805
r Sep. + 23,670 + 20,796 – 3,545 – 6,431 + 14,197 – 4,892 + 1,454 + 5,241 – 566 – 19,883
r Oct. + 18,705 + 21,649 – 1,879 – 10,681 + 14,007 – 6,269 – 3,257 + 23,280 + 858 + 7,831
r Nov. + 28,991 + 23,929 – 4,893 – 3,590 + 14,896 – 6,245 – 3,822 + 35,435 + 65 + 10,266
r Dec. + 29,133 + 16,588 – 4,437 + 1,382 + 18,077 – 6,914 + 2,354 + 34,307 – 569 + 2,820
r 2024 Jan. + 21,846 + 23,096 – 1,801 – 4,231 + 12,511 – 9,530 – 6,807 + 7,788 – 249 – 7,250
r Feb. + 26,465 + 24,594 – 3,355 – 3,638 + 10,218 – 4,709 – 1,995 + 6,760 + 1,193 – 17,710
r Mar. + 29,908 + 24,675 – 2,910 – 4,297 + 14,348 – 4,818 + 123 + 32,332 – 566 + 2,300
r Apr. + 24,297 + 24,452 – 3,172 – 5,392 + 8,384 – 3,148 – 2,028 + 6,525 – 317 – 15,743
r May + 17,390 + 25,351 – 2,393 – 8,088 + 1,655 – 1,528 – 1,372 + 23,456 + 156 + 7,439
r June + 20,594 + 21,605 – 4,304 – 6,886 + 10,441 – 4,567 + 2,628 + 15,114 + 908 – 8,107
p July + 16,035 + 19,522 – 4,216 – 9,990 + 11,684 – 5,182 – 2,393 + 35,965 – 1,194 + 22,323
1 For example, warehouse transactions for the account of residents, deductions of
goods returned and deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for
processing.  2 Including net acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets.3 Net lending: + / net borrowing: -.  4 Statistical errors and omissions resulting from the
difference between the balance on the financial account and the balances on the
current account and the capital account.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
77•
XII. External sector
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
€ million
2024
Group of countries/country 
2021 2022 
2023 Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July
All countries  1 Exports 1,371,397 1,594,034 1,590,068 134,006 136,917 140,561 129,653 129,816 135,043
Imports 1,195,499 1,505,434 1,365,825 109,419 113,568 116,605 106,960 107,598 114,337
Balance +175,898 +88,600 +224,243 +24,587 +23,350 +23,956 +22,692 +22,218 +20,706
   I. European countries Exports 941,795 1,091,554 1,087,506 92,350 94,184 96,253 89,423 88,447 90,478
Imports 795,136 973,063 881,692 72,240 73,307 76,101 68,095 70,196 73,159
Balance +146,658 +118,492 +205,814 +20,110 +20,876 +20,153 +21,328 +18,251 +17,319
      1. EU Member States (27) Exports 743,373 878,642 874,624 74,138 75,887 76,794 71,956 71,352 72,276
Imports 629,513 737,668 719,506 58,485 60,266 62,597 55,893 57,458 60,062
Balance +113,861 +140,974 +155,118 +15,653 +15,622 +14,197 +16,063 +13,894 +12,214
          Euro area (20)       Exports 518,043 617,068 614,752 51,884 52,786 53,907 50,007 49,643 51,157
          countries Imports 431,697 506,865 480,092 38,457 39,747 41,442 37,424 38,062 41,110
Balance +86,345 +110,203 +134,660 +13,427 +13,038 +12,465 +12,583 +11,581 +10,047
          of which:
               Austria Exports 72,385 90,270 81,947 6,721 6,936 7,107 6,385 6,365 6,700
  Imports 47,492 58,137 54,585 4,359 4,422 4,767 4,227 4,423 4,709
Balance +24,893 +32,134 +27,362 + 2,362 + 2,513 + 2,341 + 2,158 + 1,942 + 1,991
               Belgium and Exports 58,080 70,933 69,173 5,750 5,863 6,031 5,555 5,867 5,660
               Luxembourg Imports 55,726 67,071 56,889 4,178 4,548 4,648 4,146 4,361 4,738
Balance + 2,354 + 3,861 +12,284 + 1,572 + 1,315 + 1,383 + 1,409 + 1,506 + 922
               France Exports 102,741 118,168 120,469 10,719 10,428 11,181 9,608 9,675 10,160
  Imports 61,921 69,969 69,847 5,940 5,800 6,079 5,284 5,804 5,735
Balance +40,820 +48,198 +50,622 + 4,779 + 4,628 + 5,102 + 4,324 + 3,872 + 4,425
               Italy Exports 75,526 89,191 87,139 7,233 7,511 7,026 7,072 6,950 7,265
  Imports 65,389 73,177 72,169 5,865 5,923 5,985 5,802 5,882 6,448
Balance +10,137 +16,014 +14,969 + 1,367 + 1,588 + 1,042 + 1,270 + 1,068 + 817
               Netherlands Exports 93,101 112,261 115,279 9,320 10,032 10,040 9,265 9,281 9,511
  Imports 96,562 114,998 104,818 7,991 8,503 8,523 7,846 7,843 8,458
Balance – 3,461 – 2,737 +10,461 + 1,329 + 1,529 + 1,517 + 1,418 + 1,438 + 1,053
               Spain  Exports 43,932 49,935 54,574 4,775 4,671 4,816 4,771 4,555 4,754
  Imports 34,180 37,756 39,230 3,290 3,394 3,729 3,368 3,456 3,156
Balance + 9,752 +12,178 +15,344 + 1,486 + 1,277 + 1,087 + 1,403 + 1,099 + 1,598
          Other EU Member  Exports 225,331 261,574 259,872 22,254 23,102 22,887 21,949 21,709 21,119
          States  Imports 197,815 230,803 239,414 20,028 20,518 21,155 18,469 19,396 18,952
Balance +27,515 +30,772 +20,457 + 2,226 + 2,584 + 1,732 + 3,480 + 2,313 + 2,167
      2. Other European Exports 198,421 212,912 212,882 18,212 18,296 19,460 17,467 17,095 18,202
          countries Imports 165,623 235,395 162,186 13,755 13,042 13,503 12,203 12,738 13,097
Balance +32,798 –22,483 +50,696 + 4,458 + 5,254 + 5,956 + 5,265 + 4,357 + 5,105
          of which:
               Switzerland Exports 60,638 70,611 66,586 5,682 5,947 6,468 5,698 5,411 5,695
  Imports 49,247 55,723 51,818 4,589 4,642 4,660 4,099 4,410 4,629
Balance +11,391 +14,888 +14,768 + 1,093 + 1,305 + 1,808 + 1,599 + 1,001 + 1,066
               United Kingdom Exports 65,002 73,764 78,454 6,870 6,879 7,392 6,435 6,603 6,705
  Imports 32,245 40,314 36,679 3,108 2,963 3,066 2,685 3,023 2,941
Balance +32,757 +33,449 +41,775 + 3,762 + 3,915 + 4,325 + 3,750 + 3,580 + 3,764
   II. Non-European  Exports 427,430 497,428 497,730 41,311 42,368 43,872 39,802 40,928 44,130
       countries Imports 399,604 531,409 482,780 37,052 40,113 40,329 38,742 37,214 40,962
Balance +27,827 –33,982 +14,950 + 4,259 + 2,255 + 3,543 + 1,060 + 3,714 + 3,168
       1. Africa Exports 23,068 26,462 28,737 2,182 2,170 2,293 2,170 2,071 2,329
Imports 26,241 34,213 32,806 2,405 2,805 2,793 2,864 2,904 3,010
Balance – 3,173 – 7,751 – 4,068 – 222 – 635 – 500 – 693 – 833 – 681
       2. America Exports 167,735 210,652 216,560 18,519 19,323 20,102 18,311 18,106 19,181
  Imports 101,525 131,979 130,539 10,184 11,283 11,455 10,530 9,984 11,204
Balance +66,210 +78,673 +86,021 + 8,335 + 8,040 + 8,647 + 7,782 + 8,121 + 7,977
           of which:
               United States  Exports 121,980 156,208 157,946 13,827 14,365 14,368 13,261 12,974 14,083
  Imports 72,316 93,338 94,672 7,261 7,907 8,101 7,733 7,063 7,994
Balance +49,664 +62,871 +63,274 + 6,567 + 6,459 + 6,267 + 5,528 + 5,911 + 6,089
       3. Asia Exports 224,897 246,289 238,673 19,417 19,829 20,347 18,214 19,611 21,345
  Imports 267,604 357,702 313,193 23,599 25,259 25,666 24,910 23,855 26,270
Balance –42,707 –111,413 –74,520 – 4,182 – 5,431 – 5,319 – 6,697 – 4,244 – 4,926
           of which:
               Middle East  Exports 26,090 29,648 32,046 2,704 2,668 2,730 2,642 2,740 2,925
  Imports 7,509 13,304 15,887 632 1,006 999 1,078 1,015 1,092
Balance +18,582 +16,344 +16,158 + 2,072 + 1,662 + 1,731 + 1,564 + 1,725 + 1,833
               Japan  Exports 18,245 20,511 20,239 1,758 1,589 1,516 1,481 1,692 1,993
Imports 23,477 25,413 25,640 1,942 2,073 2,085 1,802 1,812 1,883
Balance – 5,232 – 4,902 – 5,400 – 184 – 483 – 570 – 320 – 120 + 110
               People's Republic  Exports 103,564 106,762 97,333 7,946 8,421 8,776 7,491 7,964 7,963
               of China  2 Imports 142,964 192,830 157,157 12,027 12,789 12,765 12,536 12,108 13,850
Balance –39,400 –86,068 –59,825 – 4,081 – 4,368 – 3,989 – 5,044 – 4,144 – 5,887
               New industrial countries Exports 55,295 63,344 60,942 4,821 5,033 5,128 4,515 4,991 5,987
               and emerging markets  Imports 55,441 71,012 66,520 5,006 5,079 5,254 5,082 4,970 4,947
               of Asia  3 Balance – 146 – 7,668 – 5,578 – 185 – 46 – 127 – 567 + 21 + 1,040
       4. Oceania and Exports 11,731 14,024 13,760 1,193 1,047 1,130 1,107 1,140 1,274
           polar regions Imports 4,233 7,515 6,242 864 766 415 438 470 477
Balance + 7,497 + 6,510 + 7,517 + 328 + 281 + 716 + 669 + 670 + 798
* Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, Imports
(c.i.f.) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to
the current position. Euro area incl. Croatia.  1 Including fuel and other supplies forships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region.  2 Excluding Hong Kong.
3 Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea,
Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
78•
XII. External sector
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Services  Primary income
of which: 
Zeit Total Transport Travel  1Financial
servicesCharges for
the use of
intellectual
propertyTelecommuni-
cations-, 
computer and
information
servicesOther
business
servicesGouvernment
goods and
services  2Compensation
of employeesInvestment
incomeOther
primary
income  3
r 2019 – 14,443 + 3,638 – 45,947 + 10,195 + 18,368 – 9,763 – 2,650 + 3,127 + 4,507 +127,062 – 1,475
r 2020 + 6,633 – 5,392 – 14,678 + 9,696 + 18,149 – 7,941 – 4,483 + 2,919 + 5,434 + 83,611 – 1,984
r 2021 + 1,613 – 6,717 – 24,323 + 8,280 + 31,784 – 9,449 – 9,922 + 3,059 + 5,307 +122,189 – 3,066
r 2022 – 35,984 – 11,246 – 54,946 + 8,910 + 29,373 – 12,432 – 10,206 + 3,617 + 5,463 +143,120 – 5,390
r 2023 – 64,577 – 9,907 – 72,209 + 9,206 + 21,219 – 11,931 – 14,316 + 3,345 + 5,621 +145,132 – 4,331
r 2022 Q4 – 7,871 – 2,447 – 13,323 + 2,600 + 5,965 – 2,300 – 1,776 + 754 + 1,619 + 44,658 + 2,710
r 2023 Q1 – 9,541 – 3,012 – 11,279 + 1,927 + 5,683 – 4,044 – 3,185 + 1,025 + 1,677 + 38,114 – 1,395
r Q2 – 17,082 – 1,729 – 18,270 + 2,390 + 4,679 – 2,580 – 4,601 + 868 + 1,267 + 21,566 – 4,040
r Q3 – 25,066 – 2,514 – 25,448 + 2,572 + 4,893 – 3,568 – 4,389 + 804 + 962 + 42,604 – 1,312
r Q4 – 12,889 – 2,651 – 17,213 + 2,318 + 5,965 – 1,740 – 2,142 + 647 + 1,715 + 42,848 + 2,416
r 2024 Q1 – 12,166 – 1,972 – 12,612 + 2,659 + 4,846 – 3,777 – 4,363 + 850 + 1,554 + 36,245 – 722
r Q2 – 20,366 – 1,982 – 19,534 + 2,572 + 4,466 – 2,388 – 6,092 + 725 + 1,190 + 20,466 – 1,176
r 2023 Sep. – 6,431 – 906 – 9,002 + 813 + 3,045 – 787 – 1,097 + 306 + 322 + 14,222 – 347
r Oct. – 10,681 – 1,149 – 10,928 + 451 + 2,239 – 1,433 – 797 + 327 + 513 + 12,726 + 768
r Nov. – 3,590 – 741 – 4,688 + 805 + 2,177 – 450 – 1,436 + 161 + 506 + 13,590 + 800
r Dec. + 1,382 – 761 – 1,597 + 1,061 + 1,549 + 143 + 91 + 159 + 696 + 16,532 + 849
r 2024 Jan. – 4,231 – 556 – 3,613 + 827 + 1,492 – 1,648 – 1,850 + 309 + 512 + 12,228 – 229
r Feb. – 3,638 – 387 – 3,884 + 720 + 1,228 – 1,269 – 933 + 261 + 522 + 10,010 – 314
r Mar. – 4,297 – 1,029 – 5,115 + 1,112 + 2,126 – 860 – 1,580 + 280 + 521 + 14,007 – 179
r Apr. – 5,392 – 400 – 5,214 + 831 + 2,132 – 1,666 – 1,996 + 303 + 395 + 8,384 – 395
r May – 8,088 – 838 – 7,000 + 1,033 + 1,054 – 1,133 – 2,044 + 125 + 397 + 1,641 – 383
r June – 6,886 – 743 – 7,321 + 709 + 1,280 + 412 – 2,052 + 297 + 397 + 10,441 – 397
p July – 9,990 – 624 – 7,322 + 839 + 768 – 1,941 – 2,372 + 281 + 353 + 11,745 – 415
1 Since 2001 the sample results of a household survey have been used on the
expenditure side.  2 Domestic public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on
services, not included elsewhere; including the receipts from foreign military bases.3 Includes, inter alia, taxes on leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU as
well as subsidies received from the EU.
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Secondary income Capital account
General government All sectors excluding general government  2
of which:  of which: 
Zeit Total TotalCurrent
international
cooperation  1Current
taxes on
income, wealth,
etc. TotalPersonal transfers
between
resident and
non-resident
households  3of which: 
Workers’
remittances TotalNon-produced
non-financial
assetsCapital
transfers
r 2019 – 50,375 – 29,615 – 9,457 + 11,714 – 20,760 – 5,439 – 5,431 – 4,907 – 298 – 4,609
r 2020 – 53,406 – 35,008 – 11,620 + 10,959 – 18,398 – 5,920 – 5,908 – 10,520 – 3,547 – 6,973
r 2021 – 59,499 – 37,014 – 8,929 + 12,085 – 22,485 – 6,178 – 6,170 – 3,463 – 565 – 2,899
r 2022 – 67,486 – 40,145 – 15,002 + 14,285 – 27,341 – 8,028 – 7,149 – 20,290 – 15,993 – 4,297
r 2023 – 64,234 – 36,285 – 13,692 + 14,496 – 27,949 – 7,418 – 6,805 – 26,636 – 19,116 – 7,520
r 2022 Q4 – 19,391 – 12,829 – 6,701 + 2,143 – 6,562 – 1,844 – 1,810 – 5,544 – 4,390 – 1,154
r 2023 Q1 – 18,776 – 9,952 – 3,196 + 2,453 – 8,824 – 1,882 – 1,731 – 13,931 – 10,626 – 3,305
r Q2 – 10,225 – 3,898 – 1,915 + 7,773 – 6,327 – 1,846 – 1,691 – 4,074 – 3,071 – 1,003
r Q3 – 15,805 – 9,878 – 2,959 + 2,120 – 5,927 – 1,844 – 1,691 – 3,906 – 2,270 – 1,636
r Q4 – 19,428 – 12,557 – 5,622 + 2,151 – 6,871 – 1,846 – 1,691 – 4,725 – 3,149 – 1,576
r 2024 Q1 – 19,058 – 7,210 – 1,672 + 2,829 – 11,848 – 1,935 – 1,933 – 8,679 – 6,849 – 1,831
r Q2 – 9,242 – 2,302 – 1,739 + 7,526 – 6,940 – 1,936 – 1,933 – 773 – 2,102 + 1,330
r 2023 Sep. – 4,892 – 2,878 – 962 + 1,149 – 2,014 – 615 – 564 + 1,454 + 1,839 – 385
r Oct. – 6,269 – 4,119 – 1,145 + 412 – 2,150 – 611 – 560 – 3,257 – 3,423 + 166
r Nov. – 6,245 – 4,067 – 1,227 + 466 – 2,178 – 612 – 560 – 3,822 – 3,416 – 406
r Dec. – 6,914 – 4,370 – 3,249 + 1,273 – 2,544 – 623 – 571 + 2,354 + 3,691 – 1,337
r 2024 Jan. – 9,530 – 2,191 – 640 + 552 – 7,339 – 645 – 644 – 6,807 – 5,390 – 1,417
r Feb. – 4,709 – 2,339 – 535 + 1,140 – 2,370 – 645 – 644 – 1,995 – 1,858 – 137
r Mar. – 4,818 – 2,680 – 497 + 1,137 – 2,138 – 644 – 644 + 123 + 400 – 277
r Apr. – 3,148 – 1,049 – 383 + 1,856 – 2,099 – 646 – 644 – 2,028 – 2,945 + 917
r May – 1,528 + 675 – 344 + 3,792 – 2,202 – 643 – 644 – 1,372 – 1,601 + 229
r June – 4,567 – 1,928 – 1,012 + 1,878 – 2,639 – 647 – 644 + 2,628 + 2,444 + 184
p July – 5,182 – 3,136 – 804 + 405 – 2,045 – 645 – 644 – 2,393 – 1,873 – 519
1 Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international
cooperation and other current transfers.  2 Includes insurance premiums and claims(excluding life insurance policies).  3 Transfers between resident and non-resident
households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
79•
XII. External sector
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany (net)
€ million
2023  r 2024  r 2024
Item 2021  r 2022  r 2023  r Q4  Q1  Q2 May June July  p
I.Net domestic investment abroad
 (increase: +) +800,770 +324,992 +280,033 +112,588 +175,433 +81,709 +63,068 – 5,372 +48,794
1.Direct investment +167,462 +170,355 +85,258 +44,414 +27,451 +31,970 + 5,433 +14,109 + 6,257
Equity +107,448 +104,597 +62,703 +15,017 +20,776 +25,507 + 5,812 + 8,296 + 7,569
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 +45,034 +57,980 +46,241 + 8,780 +21,056 +17,780 + 4,632 + 4,067 + 5,519
Debt instruments +60,014 +65,758 +22,554 +29,397 + 6,675 + 6,463 – 379 + 5,812 – 1,313
2.Portfolio investment +179,294 +11,575 +143,320 +12,513 +61,661 +47,020 +17,668 +26,699 +19,223
Shares  2 +46,653 –15,196 – 5,520 + 391 + 4+ 3,659 + 4,229 – 749 + 2,389
Investment fund shares  3 +123,157 +32,299 +26,718 + 5,722 +21,543 +21,928 + 8,419 + 8,516 + 9,879
Short-term  4
debt securities – 103 +16,257 + 6,044 – 252 + 6,578 + 3,601 – 2,233 + 2,240 + 1,169
Long-term   5
debt securities + 9,588 –21,785 +116,078 + 6,652 +33,536 +17,833 + 7,253 +16,691 + 5,786
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options  6 +47,880 +41,519 +39,966 – 344 + 6,439 +10,291 + 101 + 4,848 + 5,924
4.Other investment  7 +374,241 +97,117 +10,605 +55,649 +79,504 – 8,319 +39,710 –51,935 +18,585
MFIs  8 +112,904 +59,472 +42,150 –20,784 +98,981 + 4,860 +30,991 –37,536 + 5,787
Short-term +99,380 +34,961 +16,508 –35,986 +94,149 + 3,442 +29,960 –35,621 + 1,539
Long-term +13,204 +24,473 +25,575 +15,204 + 4,861 + 1,405 + 1,029 – 1,922 + 4,241
Enterprises and
households  9 +146,187 +48,548 +132,671 +19,276 +18,572 –36,109 – 4,010 –44,138 +52,569
Short-term +113,542 +24,535 +113,708 +15,639 +13,657 –39,747 – 4,312 –45,561 +52,294
Long-term –13,302 – 7,670 + 1,084 – 1,611 – 378 – 2,671 – 1,167 – 1,489 – 1,559
General government – 8,243 –25,070 + 8,123 + 3,373 – 3,312 – 258 – 914 + 757 + 2,253
Short-term – 7,256 –23,472 + 3,653 + 4,091 – 3,095 + 366 – 714 + 1,101 + 2,619
Long-term – 978 – 1,593 + 4,455 – 718 – 216 – 623 – 199 – 343 – 366
Bundesbank +123,394 +14,167 –172,339 +53,785 –34,737 +23,187 +13,643 +28,982 –42,024
5.Reserve assets +31,892 + 4,426 + 884 + 355 + 378 + 746 + 156 + 908 – 1,194
II.Net foreign investment in the
reporting country (increase: +) +593,973 +125,587 +29,880 +19,566 +128,553 +36,613 +39,612 –20,486 +12,829
1.Direct investment +85,979 +58,137 +17,938 +16,040 +15,044 +21,810 + 4,829 +10,653 + 8,170
Equity +46,470 +22,102 +24,920 + 6,251 +16,228 – 1,215 – 2,278 + 55 + 1,501
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 + 8,355 +10,299 + 2,668 + 2,010 + 5,133 – 4,666 – 3,226 – 67 + 1,543
Debt instruments +39,509 +36,035 – 6,982 + 9,789 – 1,184 +23,026 + 7,107 +10,598 + 6,668
2.Portfolio investment –18,451 – 1,568 +148,156 – 196 +58,313 +42,666 + 9,404 +30,236 +10,749
Shares  2 + 2,615 – 5,807 –12,984 – 47 – 4,197 – 583 + 59 + 952 – 1,067
Investment fund shares  3 – 8,423 – 3,207 – 1,984 – 232 – 467 + 933 – 416 + 529 + 565
Short-term  4
debt securities +30,545 –32,717 + 3,936 – 6,138 –20,838 –13,082 – 2,837 +13,769 – 9,902
Long-term   5
debt securities –43,188 +40,163 +159,188 + 6,221 +83,815 +55,398 +12,598 +14,986 +21,152
3.Other investment  7 +526,446 +69,018 –136,214 + 3,723 +55,196 –27,863 +25,379 –61,376 – 6,089
MFIs  8 +161,287 +153,003 –55,282 –93,935 +139,975 – 5,483 +10,054 –12,033 –46,070
Short-term +115,265 +160,861 –88,243 –88,073 +140,506 – 6,995 +18,203 –15,217 –49,549
Long-term +46,044 – 7,860 +32,959 – 5,863 – 526 + 1,513 – 8,149 + 3,186 + 3,479
Enterprises and
households  9 +141,143 +12,367 +57,938 +34,758 +26,768 –22,307 + 5,967 –53,202 +50,572
Short-term +99,842 – 8,533 +28,422 +32,257 +17,220 –26,917 + 4,876 –55,551 +47,323
Long-term +14,022 + 8,384 +15,335 – 1,096 + 6,124 + 1,030 – 82 + 1,076 + 2,142
General government – 2,780 – 5,634 – 622 – 4,212 + 2,287 – 848 – 251 + 124 + 1,193
Short-term – 451 – 3,253 – 968 – 4,640 + 2,318 – 645 – 222 + 93 + 1,295
Long-term – 2,326 – 2,379 + 537 + 428 – 31 – 204 – 30 + 31 – 102
Bundesbank +226,796 –90,717 –138,249 +67,112 –113,835 + 775 + 9,609 + 3,735 –11,784
III.Net financial account 
(net lending: +/net borrowing: -) +206,797 +199,405 +250,153 +93,021 +46,880 +45,095 +23,456 +15,114 +35,965
1 Estimated on the basis of the figures on the level of direct investment stocks abroad
and in the Federal Republic of Germany (see Statistical series, direct investment
statistics).  2 Including participation certificates.  3 Including reinvestment of earnings.
4 Short-term: original maturity up to one year.  5 Up to and including 2012 without
accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited.6 Balance of transactions arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as
employee stock options.  7 Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency
and deposits.  8 Excluding Bundesbank.  9 Includes the following sectors: financial
corporations (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financial
corporations, households and non-profit institutions serving households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
80•
XII. External sector
7. External position of the Bundesbank *
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
End of
reporting
period Total TotalGold
and gold
receivablesSpecial
drawing
rightsReserve
position in
the IMFCurrency,
deposits and
securities Totalof which: 
Clearing
accounts
within the
ESCB  1Portfolio
investment  2External
liabilities  3 4Net
external
position  5
6 1999 Jan. 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 – – 9,628 85,688
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 – 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,891
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 – 30,308
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,923
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 – 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,454
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,932
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,003
2013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,921
2016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,723 397,727
2017 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,527 474,318
2018 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 770,519 439,462
2019 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 663,320 497,651
2020 1,429,236 219,127 166,904 14,014 8,143 30,066 1,152,757 1,136,002 57,353 781,339 647,898
2021 1,592,822 261,387 173,821 46,491 8,426 32,649 1,276,150 1,260,673 55,285 1,009,488 583,334
2022 1,617,056 276,488 184,036 48,567 9,480 34,404 1,290,317 1,269,076 50,251 919,441 697,614
2023 1,455,788 292,259 201,335 48,766 8,782 33,376 1,117,978 1,093,371 45,550 779,844 675,943
2022 Mar. 1,516,744 277,782 187,779 47,375 8,663 33,965 1,184,501 1,169,952 54,462 808,690 708,055
Apr. 1,491,558 288,953 196,274 48,617 8,799 35,263 1,148,681 1,135,400 53,923 790,221 701,337
May 1,505,419 278,174 186,481 48,031 8,681 34,980 1,173,376 1,159,716 53,869 805,179 700,240
June 1,566,099 281,157 187,573 48,712 8,948 35,923 1,232,176 1,216,530 52,767 826,280 739,819
July 1,514,570 280,910 185,950 49,465 9,086 36,409 1,179,431 1,166,155 54,229 810,881 703,689
Aug. 1,590,572 280,160 184,794 49,614 9,300 36,451 1,258,187 1,245,014 52,225 842,576 747,996
Sep. 1,613,008 281,258 184,022 50,287 9,358 37,592 1,281,266 1,266,647 50,483 829,129 783,879
Oct. 1,569,272 274,421 178,101 49,675 9,527 37,119 1,243,873 1,230,005 50,977 811,035 758,237
Nov. 1,577,175 277,458 183,052 49,168 9,315 35,923 1,248,088 1,233,980 51,629 810,314 766,861
Dec. 1,617,056 276,488 184,036 48,567 9,480 34,404 1,290,317 1,269,076 50,251 919,441 697,614
2023 Jan. 1,508,507 281,692 190,062 48,256 9,437 33,938 1,176,042 1,162,354 50,772 793,716 714,791
Feb. 1,455,724 276,016 183,755 48,582 9,480 34,199 1,130,353 1,114,888 49,356 743,006 712,718
Mar. 1,522,539 288,131 196,405 48,039 9,373 34,314 1,184,604 1,170,620 49,804 791,478 731,061
Apr. 1,431,180 285,667 194,679 47,642 9,297 34,049 1,096,324 1,081,284 49,189 726,986 704,194
May 1,435,049 290,368 197,915 48,658 9,379 34,416 1,095,750 1,081,900 48,931 701,467 733,582
June 1,416,292 280,820 188,991 48,618 9,292 33,919 1,087,034 1,068,747 48,438 718,324 697,969
July 1,399,374 282,438 191,458 48,368 9,184 33,429 1,068,875 1,052,218 48,061 689,447 709,927
Aug. 1,406,665 284,364 192,914 48,979 9,218 33,253 1,074,575 1,056,420 47,725 687,342 719,322
Sep. 1,393,337 282,490 190,232 49,647 9,278 33,333 1,064,193 1,048,059 46,654 713,662 679,675
Oct. 1,415,403 295,288 202,630 49,531 9,256 33,871 1,074,627 1,058,985 45,488 688,966 726,437
Nov. 1,414,241 292,718 201,195 48,939 8,958 33,627 1,076,415 1,060,074 45,107 691,309 722,932
Dec. 1,455,788 292,259 201,335 48,766 8,782 33,376 1,117,978 1,093,371 45,550 779,844 675,943
2024 Jan. 1,397,172 294,402 202,641 49,412 8,921 33,428 1,058,508 1,041,902 44,261 669,890 727,281
Feb. 1,431,638 295,014 202,181 49,313 8,777 34,744 1,093,262 1,075,510 43,361 679,579 752,058
Mar. 1,436,723 312,728 220,571 49,281 8,563 34,314 1,083,242 1,065,759 40,754 666,365 770,359
Apr. 1,428,136 324,404 232,438 49,368 8,591 34,007 1,063,804 1,047,932 39,928 653,953 774,183
May 1,441,362 324,156 232,717 49,501 8,399 33,538 1,077,447 1,061,110 39,758 663,179 778,183
June 1,474,113 328,214 234,891 49,858 8,355 35,109 1,106,429 1,090,444 39,470 667,250 806,863
July 1,435,785 332,641 240,587 49,622 8,401 34,030 1,064,405 1,048,438 38,739 655,396 780,389
Aug. 1,465,307 335,465 244,992 49,207 8,318 32,948 1,090,965 1,075,239 38,877 673,181 792,126
* Assets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to
December 2000 the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revaluations,
at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the basis of
cumulative transaction values. From January 2001 all end-of-month levels are valued at
market prices.  1 Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (acc. to the respective country
designation), since November 2000 also balances with non-euro area central bankswithin the ESCB.  2 Mainly long-term debt securities from issuers within the euro area.
3 Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad.  4 See Deutsche Bundesbank,
Monthly Report, October 2014, p. 22.  5 Difference between External assets and
External liabilities.  6 Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January
1999.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
81•
XII. External sector
8. External positions of enterprises *
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities to non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
End of
reporting
period TotalBalances
with
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
grantedAdvance
payments
effected TotalLoans
from
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
usedAdvance
payments
received
Rest of the world
r 2020 1,034,224 244,415 789,808 549,157 240,652 213,833 26,819 1,429,615 172,417 1,257,198 1,038,111 219,087 130,318 88,769
r 2021 1,169,991 256,601 913,391 621,935 291,456 263,269 28,187 1,592,302 217,294 1,375,008 1,117,381 257,627 160,536 97,091
r 2022 1,247,020 250,759 996,261 675,328 320,933 291,361 29,572 1,629,245 177,095 1,452,150 1,158,894 293,255 192,495 100,760
r 2023 1,359,181 357,997 1,001,184 688,702 312,482 281,494 30,988 1,654,743 214,458 1,440,285 1,154,059 286,226 179,792 106,434
r 2024 Feb. 1,384,720 392,632 992,088 691,978 300,110 266,967 33,143 1,706,923 259,317 1,447,607 1,172,012 275,595 163,816 111,779
r Mar. 1,398,155 383,445 1,014,710 703,306 311,403 277,810 33,593 1,694,193 249,362 1,444,831 1,162,251 282,580 170,204 112,375
r Apr. 1,427,766 390,915 1,036,851 724,837 312,014 278,297 33,717 1,744,856 269,711 1,475,145 1,193,266 281,879 168,472 113,406
r May 1,418,237 389,372 1,028,866 727,364 301,502 267,469 34,033 1,760,356 272,654 1,487,702 1,213,212 274,490 160,969 113,521
r June 1,382,690 339,991 1,042,699 730,119 312,581 278,599 33,982 1,725,982 226,799 1,499,182 1,212,544 286,638 171,509 115,128
p July 1,431,611 394,191 1,037,420 732,111 305,310 270,618 34,692 1,782,044 279,644 1,502,400 1,221,909 280,490 164,942 115,548
EU Member States (27 excl. GB)
r 2020 613,888 185,572 428,316 334,474 93,842 80,833 13,009 903,486 97,851 805,635 715,854 89,781 61,887 27,895
r 2021 663,042 193,246 469,796 361,161 108,635 95,778 12,857 996,712 152,239 844,473 740,274 104,198 74,585 29,614
r 2022 712,912 190,773 522,139 397,836 124,303 110,821 13,482 1,006,529 126,999 879,530 764,435 115,095 84,054 31,041
r 2023 816,276 284,817 531,459 410,769 120,690 106,262 14,428 1,014,822 139,380 875,442 759,104 116,338 83,290 33,048
r 2024 Feb. 864,878 325,505 539,373 416,291 123,082 108,088 14,995 1,056,431 166,045 890,386 775,171 115,216 80,795 34,420
r Mar. 860,920 314,938 545,982 420,482 125,499 110,235 15,264 1,040,327 162,630 877,697 761,531 116,166 81,818 34,347
r Apr. 884,090 317,274 566,816 440,498 126,318 111,568 14,750 1,083,317 183,732 899,585 783,220 116,365 81,784 34,581
r May 883,683 321,710 561,973 440,525 121,447 106,575 14,873 1,076,480 174,040 902,441 789,637 112,803 78,096 34,707
r June 842,695 282,433 560,262 435,062 125,199 110,147 15,052 1,074,174 160,895 913,279 794,953 118,325 83,736 34,589
p July 881,057 323,873 557,184 437,991 119,193 103,732 15,461 1,106,742 189,081 917,661 803,366 114,295 79,283 35,011
Extra-EU Member States (27 incl. GB)
r 2020 420,335 58,843 361,492 214,682 146,810 133,000 13,810 526,129 74,566 451,563 322,257 129,306 68,431 60,875
r 2021 506,949 63,355 443,594 260,773 182,821 167,491 15,330 595,590 65,055 530,535 377,107 153,429 85,951 67,478
r 2022 534,107 59,986 474,122 277,492 196,629 180,540 16,090 622,716 50,096 572,620 394,460 178,160 108,441 69,719
r 2023 542,904 73,180 469,725 277,933 191,792 175,232 16,560 639,921 75,078 564,843 394,955 169,888 96,501 73,386
r 2024 Feb. 519,842 67,127 452,715 275,687 177,028 158,879 18,148 650,492 93,272 557,220 396,841 160,379 83,021 77,358
r Mar. 537,235 68,507 468,728 282,824 185,904 167,575 18,329 653,866 86,732 567,134 400,720 166,414 88,386 78,028
r Apr. 543,676 73,641 470,035 284,338 185,696 166,729 18,967 661,539 85,979 575,560 410,046 165,514 86,689 78,825
r May 534,554 67,661 466,893 286,839 180,054 160,894 19,160 683,876 98,615 585,261 423,575 161,687 82,873 78,813
r June 539,996 57,558 482,438 295,056 187,381 168,452 18,930 651,808 65,905 585,904 417,591 168,313 87,773 80,540
p July 550,554 70,317 480,236 294,120 186,116 166,886 19,230 675,302 90,563 584,739 418,543 166,196 85,659 80,537
Euro area (20)
r 2020 527,566 164,697 362,869 289,362 73,507 61,759 11,748 816,066 76,137 739,929 670,289 69,640 47,662 21,978
r 2021 556,549 171,231 385,318 299,905 85,413 73,729 11,684 911,712 130,558 781,154 699,065 82,089 58,608 23,481
r 2022 606,206 171,716 434,490 338,439 96,050 83,930 12,120 916,735 105,597 811,138 722,183 88,954 64,756 24,198
r 2023 713,257 266,931 446,326 352,927 93,399 80,382 13,016 921,774 119,987 801,787 712,302 89,485 64,843 24,642
r 2024 Feb. 765,169 307,753 457,416 362,462 94,954 81,400 13,554 949,736 136,402 813,334 727,038 86,296 60,714 25,583
r Mar. 760,512 298,258 462,254 365,821 96,433 82,644 13,789 934,237 136,205 798,032 711,671 86,361 61,060 25,301
r Apr. 783,120 300,877 482,243 384,476 97,768 84,440 13,327 973,220 152,559 820,660 733,893 86,767 61,456 25,312
r May 778,716 303,958 474,758 380,785 93,973 80,532 13,441 966,691 142,698 823,993 739,913 84,080 59,025 25,055
r June 736,829 264,600 472,229 375,874 96,355 82,872 13,483 968,782 135,443 833,339 745,876 87,463 62,865 24,599
p July 780,106 308,826 471,280 378,816 92,464 78,822 13,643 1,002,110 162,072 840,037 754,387 85,650 60,773 24,877
Extra-Euro area (20)
r 2020 506,658 79,719 426,939 259,794 167,145 152,074 15,071 613,549 96,280 517,269 367,822 149,448 82,656 66,792
r 2021 613,443 85,369 528,073 322,030 206,043 189,540 16,504 680,590 86,735 593,854 418,316 175,538 101,928 73,610
r 2022 640,814 . . . 224,882 207,431 17,452 712,510 . . . 204,301 127,739 76,562
r 2023 645,924 . . . 219,083 201,112 17,971 732,970 . . . 196,741 114,949 81,792
r 2024 Feb. 619,552 . . . 205,157 185,567 19,589 757,188 . . . 189,298 103,102 86,196
r Mar. 637,643 . . . 214,970 195,166 19,804 759,956 . . . 196,219 109,144 87,075
r Apr. 644,646 . . . 214,246 193,857 20,390 771,636 . . . 195,112 107,017 88,095
r May 639,521 . . . 207,529 186,937 20,593 793,665 . . . 190,410 101,944 88,466
r June 645,861 . . . 216,226 195,727 20,499 757,200 . . . 199,175 108,645 90,530
p July 651,505 . . . 212,845 191,797 21,049 779,935 . . . 194,840 104,169 90,671
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are shown
in Table 4 of Section IV., “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not beeneliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the figures
shown in Table XII.7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
82•
XII. External sector
9. ECB`s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly
or monthly
averageAustralia
AUDCanada
CADChina
CNYDenmark
DKKJapan
JPYNorway
NOKSweden
SEKSwitzerland
CHFUnited Kingdom
GBPUnited States
USD
2012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.2848
2013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.3281
2014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.1069
2017 1.4732 1.4647 7.6290 7.4386 126.71 9.3270 9.6351 1.1117 0.87667 1.1297
2018 1.5797 1.5294 7.8081 7.4532 130.40 9.5975 10.2583 1.1550 0.88471 1.1810
2019 1.6109 1.4855 7.7355 7.4661 122.01 9.8511 10.5891 1.1124 0.87777 1.1195
2020 1.6549 1.5300 7.8747 7.4542 121.85 10.7228 10.4848 1.0705 0.88970 1.1422
2021 1.5749 1.4826 7.6282 7.4370 129.88 10.1633 10.1465 1.0811 0.85960 1.1827
2022 1.5167 1.3695 7.0788 7.4396 138.03 10.1026 10.6296 1.0047 0.85276 1.0530
2023 1.6288 1.4595 7.6600 7.4509 151.99 11.4248 11.4788 0.9718 0.86979 1.0813
2023 Apr. 1.6389 1.4792 7.5561 7.4518 146.51 11.5187 11.3370 0.9846 0.88115 1.0968
May 1.6346 1.4687 7.5948 7.4485 148.93 11.7330 11.3697 0.9751 0.87041 1.0868
June 1.6157 1.4414 7.7653 7.4492 153.15 11.7164 11.6766 0.9764 0.85861 1.0840
July 1.6423 1.4618 7.9482 7.4508 155.94 11.3474 11.6343 0.9663 0.85856 1.1058
Aug. 1.6818 1.4703 7.9096 7.4522 157.96 11.4127 11.8117 0.9588 0.85892 1.0909
Sep. 1.6622 1.4458 7.7967 7.4566 157.80 11.4525 11.8417 0.9600 0.86158 1.0684
Oct. 1.6637 1.4474 7.7200 7.4604 158.04 11.6284 11.6472 0.9547 0.86798 1.0563
Nov. 1.6634 1.4828 7.8087 7.4581 161.84 11.7958 11.5475 0.9634 0.87045 1.0808
Dec. 1.6321 1.4653 7.7870 7.4556 157.21 11.5333 11.2028 0.9441 0.86168 1.0903
2024 Jan. 1.6422 1.4631 7.8201 7.4572 159.46 11.3501 11.2834 0.9368 0.85873 1.0905
Feb. 1.6533 1.4564 7.7651 7.4550 161.38 11.3843 11.2500 0.9462 0.85466 1.0795
Mar. 1.6586 1.4726 7.8297 7.4566 162.77 11.5214 11.3054 0.9656 0.85524 1.0872
Apr. 1.6469 1.4661 7.7658 7.4596 165.03 11.6828 11.5910 0.9761 0.85658 1.0728
May 1.6317 1.4780 7.8206 7.4606 168.54 11.5988 11.6186 0.9830 0.85564 1.0812
June 1.6206 1.4750 7.8051 7.4592 169.81 11.4178 11.2851 0.9616 0.84643 1.0759
July 1.6257 1.4868 7.8750 7.4606 171.17 11.7160 11.5324 0.9676 0.84332 1.0844
Aug. 1.6559 1.5049 7.8736 7.4614 161.06 11.7895 11.4557 0.9450 0.85150 1.1012
* Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference
rates, see Statistical Series Exchange rate statistics.
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units … 
1999 January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603    
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399    
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573  
France French franc FRF 6.55957  
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583  
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27        
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399    
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371  
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482      
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386      
2001 January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750      
2007 January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640      
2008 January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009 January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260    
2011 January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466    
2014 January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015 January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280  
2023 January 1 Croatia Croatian kuna HRK 7.53450  

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
September 2024
83•
XII. External sector
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness *
Q1 1999 = 100
Effective exchange rates of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the  Indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness
extended EER group of trading partners  1broad EER group of
trading partners  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 vis-à-vis Based on consumer price indices vis-à-vis 
27 selected industrial countries  4
of which:
Period NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indicesIn real terms
based on
the deflators
of gross
domestic
product  3In real terms
based on
unit labour
costs of
national
economy  3 NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indices TotalEuro area
countriesNon-
euro area
countries 37 countries  527 selected
industrial
countries  437 countries  560 countries  6
1999 96.2 96.1 95.8 96.1 96.5 95.9 97.8 99.6 95.7 97.6 98.3 98.1 97.8
2000 87.0 86.8 85.9 85.5 88.0 86.1 92.0 97.5 85.5 91.2 93.1 92.3 91.2
2001 87.4 87.1 86.5 84.4 90.1 86.9 91.9 96.7 86.2 90.7 93.0 91.7 91.1
2002 89.7 90.3 89.7 88.1 94.4 90.5 92.7 96.0 88.7 91.4 93.5 92.2 91.9
2003 100.5 101.6 101.0 99.3 106.5 101.7 96.3 95.2 97.9 95.8 97.0 96.7 96.8
2004 104.3 105.6 104.1 102.6 111.0 105.6 96.8 94.2 100.6 96.2 98.5 98.2 98.4
2005 102.9 104.3 102.1 100.8 109.1 103.2 95.3 92.6 99.3 93.9 98.5 97.2 96.8
2006 102.9 104.3 101.5 99.8 109.3 102.6 94.1 91.0 98.8 92.2 98.6 96.8 96.0
2007 106.5 107.3 103.8 101.5 112.9 104.8 95.3 90.3 102.8 92.7 100.9 98.3 97.4
2008 110.4 110.3 105.9 105.4 117.8 107.3 95.6 89.0 106.0 92.1 102.4 98.5 97.6
2009 111.9 111.1 107.2 108.9 120.8 108.3 96.3 90.2 105.8 93.1 101.9 98.6 97.9
2010 104.6 103.3 98.8 101.4 112.1 99.3 93.4 89.6 99.2 89.0 98.8 94.3 92.5
2011 104.4 102.4 96.9 99.7 112.9 98.8 93.0 89.3 98.6 88.2 98.2 93.5 91.9
2012 98.6 97.0 91.2 93.9 107.6 94.0 90.9 89.1 93.4 85.5 95.9 90.5 88.9
2013 102.2 100.1 94.3 96.8 112.4 97.0 93.3 89.7 98.6 87.6 98.1 92.3 90.9
2014 102.4 99.5 94.2 97.0 114.7 97.4 94.1 90.6 99.0 88.5 98.2 92.5 91.5
2015 92.5 89.6 85.6 86.3 106.1 88.7 90.7 91.2 90.0 84.5 94.3 87.8 86.9
2016 95.2 91.6 87.9 p 87.7 110.1 90.7 91.7 91.7 91.6 85.9 95.0 88.8 88.1
2017 97.5 93.6 89.1 p 88.6 112.5 92.0 92.9 91.7 94.5 86.6 96.3 89.9 88.9
2018 100.0 95.8 90.6 p 90.4 117.3 95.2 94.1 91.8 97.5 87.5 97.7 91.1 90.8
2019 98.1 93.3 88.9 p 88.0 115.5 92.5 93.1 92.0 94.7 86.7 96.4 89.9 89.4
2020 99.7 93.7 90.2 p 89.3 119.2 93.9 93.3 92.3 94.8 87.3 96.4 90.1 90.1
2021 99.6 93.7 88.9 p 87.4 120.5 94.3 94.1 92.3 96.6 87.3 97.4 90.6 90.9
2022 95.3 90.8 84.1 p 82.5 116.1 p 90.9 92.5 91.8 93.3 85.5 95.9 89.1 89.0
2023 98.1 94.0 88.5 p 86.3 121.8 p 94.7 94.1 92.2 96.8 87.6 98.0 91.3 91.6
2022 Mar. 95.8 91.5 117.9 p 92.6 96.3 89.5 89.9
Apr. 95.0 90.1 116.0 p 90.3 96.1 88.9 88.8
May 95.4 90.5 83.6 p 82.2 115.8 p 90.2 92.6 91.8 93.7 85.4 96.5 89.5 89.1
June 95.7 90.7 116.1 p 90.3 95.7 88.7 88.3
July 93.9 89.2 114.1 p 88.9 94.8 87.9 87.5
Aug. 93.4 88.9 82.4 p 80.9 113.6 p 88.7 91.5 91.5 91.4 84.7 94.5 87.6 87.3
Sep. 93.9 89.9 113.9 p 89.3 95.9 89.1 88.7
Oct. 94.5 91.3 114.8 p 90.8 96.0 89.7 89.4
Nov. 95.7 92.3 84.9 p 83.2 116.6 p 92.0 92.6 91.9 93.5 86.1 97.0 90.6 90.3
Dec. 96.8 92.6 118.6 p 92.9 96.2 89.7 89.8
2023 Jan. 97.1 92.8 119.2 p 93.1 97.5 90.4 90.5
Feb. 97.0 93.1 87.2 p 85.1 119.3 p 93.4 93.5 91.8 95.9 86.6 97.7 90.5 90.6
Mar. 97.3 93.2 119.7 p 93.6 98.0 90.9 91.1
Apr. 98.4 94.2 121.5 p 94.9 98.5 91.5 91.9
May 98.0 93.6 88.2 p 85.8 120.9 p 94.2 94.1 92.2 96.9 87.5 98.1 91.1 91.3
June 98.2 93.8 121.8 p 94.7 98.2 91.3 91.8
July 99.2 94.9 123.7 p 96.1 98.4 91.8 92.5
Aug. 99.0 95.0 89.4 p 87.2 123.7 p 96.1 94.1 92.1 96.9 88.1 98.3 91.8 92.4
Sep. 98.5 94.6 123.0 p 95.5 98.0 91.7 92.1
Oct. 98.0 94.1 122.5 p 95.0 97.7 91.3 91.7
Nov. 98.7 94.6 89.2 p 86.9 123.4 p 95.3 94.6 92.8 97.3 88.4 98.2 91.6 91.9
Dec. 98.2 93.9 123.2 p 94.9 97.7 91.1 91.5
2024 Jan. 98.4 94.4 123.6 p 95.2 97.8 91.4 p 91.8
Feb. 98.1 94.1 89.5 p 87.4 123.3 p 94.9 94.3 92.6 96.8 88.2 97.7 91.3 p 91.6
Mar. 98.8 94.8 124.2 p 95.5 98.1 91.8 p 92.1
Apr. 98.6 p 94.5 124.0 p 95.2 98.3 p 91.8 p 92.1
May 98.9 p 94.8 ... ... 124.4 p 95.3 p94.6 p 92.7 97.4 p 88.5 98.6 p 92.0 p 92.2
June 98.5 p 94.5 124.0 p 95.0 98.1 p 91.8 p 92.0
July 99.0 p 95.1 124.8 p 95.5 98.4 p 92.0 p 92.2
Aug. 99.0 p 94.9 ... ... 125.2 p 95.7 ... ... ... ... p98.1 p 91.7 p 92.1
* The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the curren-
cy concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German economy's price
competitiveness is consistent with the procedure to compute the effective exchange
rates of the euro. A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. The
weights are based on trade in manufactured goods and services. For more detailed in-
formation on methodology and weighting scale, see the website of the Deutsche
Bundesbank (https://www.bundesbank.de/content/796162).  1 The calculations are
based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral exchange rates of the
euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the following 18 countries: Australia, Bulgaria, Canada,
China, Czechia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Norway, Poland, Romania,
Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United
States. Where current price and wage indices were not available, estimates were used.
2 Includes countries belonging to the extended EER group of trading partners (fixed
composition) and additionally the following 23 countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil,
Chile, Colombia, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zea-
land, Peru, Philippines, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Taiwan,Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine and United Arab Emirates. The ECB has suspended the
publication and calculation of the euro foreign exchange reference rate against Russian
rouble with effect from March 2, 2022 until further notice. For the calculation of
effective exchange rates, an indicative rate is used for the Russian Federation from that
date. It is calculated from the daily RUB/USD rates determined by the Bank of Russia in
conjunction with the respective ECB's euro foreign exchange reference rate to the US
dollar.  3 Annual and quarterly averages.  4 Euro area countries (from 2001 including
Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta, from
2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including Latvia, from
2015 including Lithuania, from 2023 including Croatia) as well as Canada, Denmark,
Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.
5 Euro area countries (current composition) and countries belonging to the extended
EER group of trading partners (fixed comosition).  6 Euro area countries (current compo-
sition) and countries belonging to the broad EER group of trading partners (fixed
composition).

