Monthly Report
February 2024
Vol. 76  
No 2

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel.: +49 (0)69 9566 33512  
Email: www.bundesbank.de/kontakt
Internet: www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report 
went to press at 11 p.m. on 16 February 2024.Publishing schedules for selected statistics can 
be downloaded from our website. The statis -
tical data are also published on the website.
The Monthly Report is published by the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by 
virtue of Section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It is 
available to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German 
 language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  7
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  13
The economic impact of shipping disruptions in the Red Sea  ..............................................  16
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  25
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  26
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  37
The German economy  ...............................................................................................  43
House prices in Germany in 2023  .......................................................................................  47
Recent inflation developments in the light of a stylised macro model  .................................  51
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  57
German government budget in times of crisis –  developments in the period 2020 to 2023   59
The reform of the EU’s fiscal rules  .......................................................................................  65
The steep rise in central government interest expenditure  ...................................................  71
Higher retirement age alleviates demographic burdens  ......................................................  77Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  66 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  75 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  85 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
4

The current economic situation in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
5

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
6

Overview
Continued disinflation amid 
weak economic activity
Moderate growth in global 
economy given pronounced 
regional  and sectoral 
differences 
The global economy saw moderate growth in 
the final quarter of 2023, with regional differ -
ences in global activity persisting. In the euro 
area, economic output stagnated. In China, 
too, growth remained subdued in view of the 
ongoing downturn in the real estate market. By 
contrast, the US economy continued to expand 
at a brisk pace. Overall, the global economy re -
mained solid in spite of strains such as the still 
relatively high energy and food prices, the 
tightening of monetary policy in many regions, 
heightened geopolitical risks and a variety of 
structural challenges.
Global industrial output increased moderately 
in the fourth quarter of 2023, again driven by 
the emerging market economies. In the ad -
vanced economies, by contrast, output has 
been falling on a trend basis for more than a 
year, with weak industrial activity in the euro 
area being a key factor. Imports of goods by 
advanced economies declined even more 
sharply. According to business surveys, 2024, 
too, got off to a subdued start in the industrial 
sector and global trade. The services sector, on 
the other hand, appears to be gaining momen -
tum.
Decline in inflation 
decelerating ; risks still tilted 
to the upside
Energy commodity prices have seen mixed 
growth of late. European gas prices fell signifi -
cantly against the backdrop of persistently 
weak euro area industrial activity, the at times mild winter temperatures and stable gas im -
ports. Over the same period, crude oil prices 
rose slightly. Concerns surrounding a further 
escalation of the conflicts in the Middle East 
bolstered price developments. Recently, infla -
tion has eased somewhat more slowly. In the 
group of advanced economies, the annual 
growth rate of consumer prices fell to 3.1% in 
January, and the core rate excluding energy 
and food sank to 3.8%. Risks with regard to 
future consumer price developments are likely 
to remain tilted to the upside for the most part. 
Should the conflicts in the Middle East spread 
to oil- producing countries, this would drive en -
ergy and consumer prices back up. Moreover, 
the tight labour markets in many areas and 
persistently high wage growth could jeopardise 
the continuation of the disinflationary process.
Market participants antici -
pating earlier and sharper 
key interest rate cuts
Activity in the international financial markets 
was shaped by greater confidence among mar -
ket players that inflation in 2024 could globally 
recede faster than previously anticipated. In 
November and December 2023, they gradually 
revised their previous assessment that key inter -
est rates in many currency areas, such as the 
United States and the euro area, would remain 
at high levels for an extended period of time 
(higher- for- longer interest rate scenario), and 
instead assumed earlier and sharper key inter -
est rate cuts. Market participants’ adjustment 
of their expectations was mainly driven by a 
significant fall in energy prices and by their 
hopes that disinflation would progress more 
rapidly than previously expected. The US Fed -
eral Reserve also sent early signals that it would 
probably be able to lower policy rates in 2024. 
For instance, following the Federal Open Mar -
ket Committee (FOMC) meeting in December, 
Fed Chair Jerome Powell expressed the view Moderate global 
growth
Weak industrial 
activity in 
advanced 
economies 
Mixed commod -
ity prices of late; 
consumer price 
inflation weak -
ens furtherExpectations of 
declining infla -
tion and sharper 
key interest rate 
cuts weighing 
on yieldsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
7

that interest rates in the United States had 
probably reached their peak, and that key inter -
est rate cuts could follow in 2024. This contrib -
uted to an appreciation of the euro against the 
US dollar. US inflation was slightly higher than 
anticipated in January, causing these expect -
ations that key interest rates would come back 
down soon to weaken somewhat. In light of 
the continued robustness of US macro data 
emanating in particular from the labour market 
in the new year, however, investors’ confidence 
in a soft landing for the US economy in the 
event of a decline in inflation increased overall. 
In the euro area, some members of the ECB 
Governing Council indicated that they regard a 
key interest rate cut in summer as conceivable. 
Against this backdrop, market participants an -
ticipated distinctly earlier and sharper key inter -
est rate cuts than previously assumed, given 
the more optimistic inflation expectations and 
the relatively subdued European economic out -
look. Both currency areas saw a significant de -
cline in long- term nominal and real interest 
rates in this setting: a development which, 
coupled with a sustained robust risk appetite 
on the part of market players, resulted in sig -
nificant price gains for risky assets.
Eurosystem leaves key interest 
rates unchanged
At its monetary policy meetings in December 
2023 and January 2024, the Governing Council 
of the ECB left its three key interest rates un -
changed. According to the Eurosystem staff’s 
December projections for the euro area, infla -
tion is expected to decline gradually over the 
course of 2024 before approaching the 2% tar -
get in 2025. In January, the Governing Council 
noted that the incoming data since December 
broadly confirmed this expectation. Overall, on 
the basis of its December and January assess -
ments, it continued to hold that the key inter -
est rates had reached levels that would make a 
substantial contribution to the timely return of 
inflation to the target. For this to happen, though, the key interest rate levels would have 
be maintained for a sufficiently long duration.
In December 2023, the Governing Council also 
decided to advance the normalisation of the 
Eurosystem’s balance sheet. It intends to con -
tinue to reinvest, in full, the principal payments 
from maturing securities purchased under the 
pandemic emergency purchase programme 
(PEPP) during the first half of 2024. Over the 
second half of the year, it plans to reduce the 
PEPP portfolio by €7.5 billion per month on 
average, and to fully discontinue the reinvest -
ment of redemptions by the end of 2024.
Recovery in demand for short- 
term loans in the euro area 
signals turning point in credit 
growth
In the final quarter of 2023, the broad monet -
ary aggregate M3 recorded growth for the first 
time in five quarters. In view of the persistently 
low interest rate on overnight deposits, the 
money- holding sectors continued to shift funds 
into higher- yielding forms of investment. In 
contrast to the previous quarters, however, 
funds were still being channelled into higher-  
yielding M3 holdings purely through the shift -
ing of financial assets in the fourth quarter of 
2023, which had a positive impact on monet -
ary growth. On the output side, a marked re -
covery in lending to the domestic private sector 
and a significant increase in the net external 
assets of monetary financial institutions con -
tributed to the increase in monetary growth. 
The anticipated end of the monetary policy 
tightening cycle and the expectation of falling 
lending rates boosted non- financial corpor -
ations’ demand for short- term loans, in particu -
lar. At the same time, those banks participating 
in the latest round of the Bank Lending Survey 
(BLS) reported that they had barely tightened 
their lending policies any further in the final 
quarter of 2023.Monetary 
policy : ECB 
Governing  
Council leaves 
key interest rates 
unchanged …… and 
announces earl -
ier end to PEPP 
reinvestments
Annual M3 
growth becomes 
positive again 
and lending 
recoversDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
8

Lending in Germany weakened 
further
In Germany, by contrast, lending to the domes -
tic non- financial private sector weakened fur -
ther in the fourth quarter. Lending to non-  
financial corporations stagnated. Two factors 
were behind this. First, there were the relatively 
high funding costs, which, together with sub -
dued industrial and construction activity and 
the uncertain economic outlook, dampened 
demand for credit. The second was that the 
banks surveyed in the BLS once again tight -
ened their lending policies, mainly owing to in -
creased credit risk in light of the subdued eco -
nomic situation and outlook in addition to 
sector-specific and firm- specific factors. Lend -
ing to households also continued to lose mo -
mentum. It was higher construction prices and 
high funding costs in particular which damp -
ened demand for bank loans.
German economic output 
down in Q4 2023
German economic output shrank in the fourth 
quarter of 2023. According to the Federal Stat -
istical Office’s flash estimate, real gross domes -
tic product (GDP) fell by a seasonally adjusted 
0.3% on the quarter after virtually stagnating 
in the first three quarters.1 Industry continued 
to be impacted by weak foreign demand. The 
rise in funding costs remained a drag on invest -
ment and thus on domestic demand for indus -
trial goods and construction services. More -
over, uncertainty regarding climate and trans -
formation policy is likely to have dampened in -
vestment. In addition, inclement weather 
constrained construction activity. Further pres -
sure was placed on economic activity by the 
relatively high sickness rate. By contrast, lower 
inflation, the robust labour market and strong 
wage growth supported real private consump -
tion. However, consumers probably remained 
cautious in their expenditure.Labour market remains robust
The protracted economic downturn has had 
only a mild impact on the labour market so far. 
Despite a decline in economic output, employ -
ment increased slightly in the fourth quarter. 
Whilst unemployment reached a somewhat 
higher level than in the third quarter, the in -
crease likely came to an end in the past two 
months. The number of job vacancies also sta -
bilised recently, following an earlier decline. 
The same applies to most leading labour mar -
ket indicators. Thus, there are no signs that the 
weak economy will cause the labour market to 
worsen significantly. Nor are there any indica -
tions of a sustained rise in employment and a 
concomitant decline in unemployment, which 
has recently slightly increased.
At 3.6% in the fourth quarter of 2023, negoti -
ated wages temporarily rose less sharply than 
in the third quarter, in which they were up by 
4.7%. As in the first three quarters of 2023, 
large tax and social contribution- exempt infla -
tion compensation bonuses played a key role. 
All in all, the pay round settlements that have 
been concluded thus far envisage robust wage 
increases for 2024 and 2025. The sharp in -
crease in actual earnings in the previous ten 
quarters continued and is likely once again to 
have significantly exceeded the increase in ne -
gotiated wages in the fourth quarter of 2023. 
Trade unions’ wage demands remain very high, 
likely partly due to previous real wage losses.
Continued disinflation
For the first time since the end of 2020, con -
sumer price inflation (HICP) was only marginal 
in the fourth quarter of 2023. On average 
across the months of October to December 
2023, consumer prices increased by only a sea -
sonally adjusted 0.2%, compared with +0.7% German banks’ 
lending to 
domestic private 
sector weakens 
further
German GDP 
shrinks in Q4 
2023Employment 
and unemploy -
ment both up 
slightly in Q4
Weaker rise in 
negotiated 
wages in Q4; 
strong rise in 
actual earnings
Disinflation 
continued  in 
Q4 2023
1 Seasonal adjustment here and in the remainder of this 
text also includes adjustment for calendar variations, pro -
vided they can be verified and quantified. The flash esti -
mate also included some revisions for previous quarters.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
9

in the previous quarter. This disinflation was 
also clear in the year- on- year comparison, in 
which the headline inflation rate fell to 3.0% 
from a level of 5.7% in the preceding quarter. 
The sharp rise in energy prices in the last quar -
ter of 2022 had a dampening effect here. The 
core inflation rate (HICP excluding energy and 
food) also dropped steeply from 5.8% to 3.6%.
The HICP rate dropped markedly in January as 
well, from 3.8% to 3.1%. This was mainly due 
to the elimination of the base effect from the 
2022 price- lowering Emergency Aid for Natural 
Gas Heating for End Consumers (Erdgas-  
Wärme-  Soforthilfe) , which had temporarily sig -
nificantly increased the December rate. By con -
trast, the core inflation rate held steady at 
3.4%. The inflation rate may well trend down 
further in the next few months. In some cases, 
strong fluctuations in the year- on- year rate are 
to be expected. This will also be due to some 
base effects from energy and local public trans -
port. The main factor behind the disinflation 
process is the declining price dynamics in food 
and industrial goods. Here, weakening inflation 
has an impact on upstream stages. By contrast, 
price pressures in the services sector are likely 
to ease much more slowly in the coming 
months, partly because wage growth remains 
strong.
No recovery in the German 
economy yet
Some stress factors are likely to remain relevant 
in the first quarter of 2024. Foreign industrial 
demand recently trended significantly down -
ward. Consumers are likely to remain cautious 
in their spending. Higher funding costs may 
constrain domestic investment. Additionally, 
uncertainty regarding climate and transform -
ation policy remains elevated. Furthermore, ef -
fects on production resulting from various 
strikes – including the rail and aviation strikes – 
cannot be ruled out. There are still orders on 
hand in industry and construction. However, 
they are dwindling. Economic output is thus likely to once again decline slightly in the first 
quarter of 2024. This second consecutive de -
cline in economic output would put the Ger -
man economy into a technical recession. While 
this would mean the ongoing period of weak -
ness in the German economy following the 
start of the Russian war of aggression against 
Ukraine would continue, there is still no evi -
dence of a recession in the sense of a persist -
ent, broad- based and distinct drop in economic 
activity, nor is such a recession currently on the 
cards. In particular, the income situation and 
thus household consumption are likely to con -
tinue to improve in the future given the stable 
labour market, sharply rising wages and the 
declining inflation rate.
Public finances improved in 
2023
Germany’s public finances improved last year. 
The deficit and debt ratios continued to decline 
and were moderate by EU standards. This was 
not due to a policy of austerity, however. In 
fact, the deficit fell (to 2% of GDP) because 
temporary measures to contain the COVID-  19 
pandemic were no longer necessary and were 
allowed to lapse. By contrast, support meas -
ures relating to the energy crisis burdened pub -
lic coffers slightly more than in 2022. Weak 
growth in tax revenues and higher interest and 
military spending also drove up the deficit. The 
debt ratio declined to just under 65% at the 
end of the third quarter because price develop -
ments meant that nominal GDP continued to 
outpace debt.
Deficit set to shrink further 
in 2024 absent major 
consolidation 
The deficit looks set to shrink further this year. 
This is because most of the support measures 
relating to the energy crisis have been allowed 
to lapse. Apart from this, however, fiscal policy 
looks set to become easier. In some areas, ex -Inflation fell 
slightly further in 
January; core 
rate unchanged
Economic out -
put may con -
tract once again 
in Q1 2024Public finances 
improved in 
2023 as costs 
related to the 
COVID-  19 pan -
demic ended 
and nominal 
GDP growth 
depressed the 
debt ratioDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
10

penditure is increasing, especially in the Federal 
Armed Forces and Germany’s Climate Change 
and Transformation Fund. State and local gov -
ernment are experiencing significant growth in 
staff expenses, amongst other things, owing 
mainly to higher wages. Spending by social 
security funds is also growing dynamically. 
However, this is largely being offset by higher 
contribution rates to the public long- term care 
and health insurance schemes.
In its 2024 budget plan, central government 
will, after four years, no longer make use of the 
debt brake escape clause. Nonetheless, it will 
still run large deficits; these deficits add up to 
just over €100 billion in the plans for central 
government and its off- budget entities. One-  
fifth of this total (€20 billion) is attributable to 
the Federal Armed Forces Fund, which is ex -
empted from the debt brake. The debt brake 
allows cyclical deficits, deficits for the acquisi -
tion of financial assets (e.g. generational cap -
ital) and a structural deficit of 0.35% of GDP to 
be financed using net borrowing. These items 
add up to an additional two- fifths of the 
planned deficit. Central government will cover 
the remaining two- fifths using reserves.
As compared with the first government drafts, 
there is a marked reduction in the deficit essen -
tially only in terms of the support measures in 
relation to the energy crisis. The large deficit 
earmarked for the Climate and Transformation 
Fund remains virtually unchanged, although 
the Federal Constitutional Court ruling reduced 
the reserve by €60 billion. Overall, however, 
this will leave hardly any reserves on the books 
in 2025 for the area of relevance to the debt 
brake. Adjustments will consequently have to 
be made next year.
Effective debt brake important
Such adjustments will require difficult decisions 
to be made. New priorities will have to be set 
on the expenditure side or the revenue side will 
have to be adjusted. Effective fiscal rules are especially important in such situations in order 
to ensure sound public finances. This does not 
preclude a stability-  oriented reform. The 
Bundesbank made its own proposals for the 
German debt brake in the spring of 2022, and 
the basic considerations at that time still apply: 
the German budget ceilings should ensure that 
the debt ratio generally complies with the 60% 
reference value and returns to it quickly follow -
ing a breach. The currently applicable borrow -
ing limit for central government can be relaxed 
somewhat given this objective as long as the 
ceiling is not watered down in its application. 
In this context, it is also possible to earmark 
parts of the borrowing facilities for certain gov -
ernment expenditure items. This could be 
done, for example, using a capped golden rule, 
as discussed by the Bundesbank: up to a fixed 
ceiling, government net investment can be 
financed by borrowing. A special fund with its 
own credit limit in Germany’s Basic Law (Grund -
gesetz) could be designed in such a way that it 
extends the leeway for a deficit in a compar -
able way; it would therefore not contradict 
these basic considerations.
EU rules should be applied in 
such a way that high debt 
ratios fall rapidly
The EU’s budgetary rules, which Germany must 
likewise comply with, are being reformed. As 
things currently stand, it looks as though the 
reform will further expand discretionary scope 
in decision- making and application. Its imple -
mentation will therefore be crucial. A welcome 
aspect is that important fiscal anchors will re -
main in place. Specifically, the reference values 
of 3% for the deficit ratio and 60% for the 
debt ratio will continue to apply. And the def -
icit targets for a Member State are significantly 
stricter if it fails to meet a reference value. 
However, a number of aspects are problematic. 
This includes the fact that these budgetary 
limits for several years depend, not least, on as -
sumptions which the European Commission ar -
ranges in negotiations with the respective Deficit set to 
shrink further in 
2024 as most 
support meas -
ures relating to 
the energy crisis 
are allowed to 
lapse – other -
wise, fiscal 
policy  likely to 
be easier
Central govern -
ment will no 
longer make use 
of the escape 
clause in 2024 
but will still run 
large deficits
Course virtually 
unchanged in 
2024, resulting 
in considerable 
pressure in 2025Debt brake 
intended to 
ensure sound 
public finances – 
which does not 
preclude 
stability- oriented 
reform
Implementation 
crucial for EU 
rulesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
11

Member State. At the same time, the rules are 
very complicated. They are likely to be very dif -
ficult to understand, both in abstract terms and 
in their concrete application. It is therefore to 
be feared that the interested public will be lost 
as an important pillar of oversight. In addition, 
the rules will start off with watered- down re -
quirements during a transitional period. During 
this period, currently high debt ratios could be -
come further entrenched or even rise. Overall, 
there is a danger that the new rules will make little contribution to the objective of sound 
public finances as there is much leeway in how 
they are implemented. This makes it all the 
more important that the European Commission 
and ECOFIN translate the rules into ambitious 
requirements and press for Member State com -
pliance. Such strict application of the rules 
would, not least, strengthen capital markets’ 
confidence in highly indebted euro area coun -
tries.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
12

Global and European setting
Global economic 
developments 
The global economy saw moderate growth in 
the final quarter of 2023, with regional differ -
ences in global activity persisting. Economic ac -
tivity stagnated in the euro area and declined 
again in the United Kingdom and Japan. 
Growth remained subdued in China, too, in 
light of the ongoing downturn in its real estate 
market. By contrast, the economy of the United 
States continued to see brisk expansion. Over -
all, the global economy remained solid in spite 
of strain from sources including the still rela -
tively high prices of energy and food, the tight -
ening of monetary policy in many regions, 
heightened geopolitical risks and a variety of 
structural challenges.
Global industrial output increased moderately 
in the fourth quarter of 2023, again driven by 
the emerging market economies. In the ad -
vanced economies, by contrast, output has 
tended downwards for more than a year, with 
weak industrial activity in the euro area being a 
key factor. Imports of goods by advanced 
economies declined even more sharply. Global 
goods trade thus remained weak overall last 
year. According to business surveys, industry 
and global trade also got off to a subdued start 
in 2024. The services sector, on the other hand, 
appears to be gaining momentum.
Commodity prices for energy have seen mixed 
growth in recent times. European gas prices fell 
significantly against the backdrop of persist -
ently weak industrial activity in the euro area, 
the at times mild winter temperatures, and 
stable gas imports. As this report went to press, 
one megawatt hour of gas cost approximately 
€25 in Europe and thus around 40% less than 
at the beginning of December. Over the same 
period, crude oil prices rose marginally. Con -cerns surrounding a further escalation of the 
conflicts in the Middle East bolstered price de -
velopments. As this report went to press, a bar -
rel of Brent crude oil cost US$85, a similar price 
to one year earlier. Forward rates, however, are 
indicative of falling prices over the coming 
months. This is consistent with the International 
Energy Agency’s assessment that global oil 
markets are likely to be oversupplied in 2024.1
Recently, consumer price inflation has eased 
somewhat more slowly. Among the industrial Moderate global 
growth
Weak industrial 
activity in 
advanced 
economies 
Commodity 
prices for energy 
recently mixedGlobal industrial output and goods trade
82859095100105110115December 2019 = 100, log scale, seasonally and price adjusted
2020 2021 2022 2023
Sources: CPB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbankof which:
Advanced economies
Emerging market economies
80859095100105110115Global
Goods tradeIndustrial output
1 See International Energy Agency (2024).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
13

countries, the year- on- year rate of consumer 
prices has decreased by a total of 0.3 percent -
age point since October 2023 to 3.1% in Janu -
ary, while the core rate excluding energy and 
food has fallen to 3.8%. Risks with regard to 
future consumer price developments are likely 
to remain largely tilted to the upside. The re -cent obstacles to shipping in the Red Sea are 
unlikely to have any significant impact on con -
sumer prices (see the box on pp. 16 f.). How -
ever, should the conflicts in the Middle East 
spread to the oil- producing countries, energy 
and consumer prices would again be driven up. 
Moreover, the tight labour markets in many 
areas and persistently high wage growth could 
jeopardise the continuation of the disinflation -
ary process.
Given the brisk economic activity in the United 
States and the economic policy support meas -
ures in China, the staff of the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) had a somewhat more 
optimistic outlook for the future.2 In its regular 
update of its World Economic Outlook, the IMF 
staff revised its projection for global economic 
growth in 2024 slightly upwards to 3.1%. It 
kept its projection for next year unchanged at 
3.2%. According to the IMF’s projections, the 
global economy is thus likely to continue on its 
path of moderate growth. Furthermore, the 
IMF now expects inflation to decline more rap -
idly in the industrial countries. Inflation is likely 
to recede to 2.3% by the final quarter of 2024.
China
Chinese economic activity remained muted at 
the end of 2023. According to the official esti -
mate, China’s gross domestic product (GDP) 
grew by just 1.0% on the quarter after price 
and seasonal adjustment. As a result, the gov -
ernment’s growth target of 5% for the year as 
a whole was only barely exceeded. In particu -
lar, the persistent weakness in the real estate 
market weighed on the economy. Most re -
cently, private consumption also lost momen -
tum. Moderate rises in sales figures in foreign 
markets were only partially able to offset this. 
Recent economic stimuli appear to be having 
an initial impact. Investment in infrastructure 
increased considerably in recent months.Consumer price 
inflation con -
tinuing to ease 
in advanced 
economiesIMF global eco -
nomic outlook 
remains 
subdued 
Muted eco -
nomic activity 
in ChinaEnergy prices
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and Haver Analytics. • Latest 
figures:  Average  of  1  to  15  February  2024.  1 Price  for  the 
front-month futures contract.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2420406080100120Monthly averages
04080120160200240
Reduced scale
Natural gas (TTF)1
in euro per MWhCrude oil (Brent)
in US$ per barrel
Sources:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  national  data. 
* EU, Canada, Japan, Norway, Switzerland, the United King-
dom and the United States. 1 Consumer prices excluding en-
ergy and food; additionally excluding alcoholic beverages and 
tobacco  products  for  the  EU,  Norway,  Switzerland  and  the 
United Kingdom.
Deutsche BundesbankConsumer prices in industrial countries*
0123456789
+++++++++Year-on-year percentage change
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 24Headline Core1
e
2 See International Monetary Fund (2024).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
14

This year, the Chinese economy is likely to con -
tinue to be supported by expansionary fiscal 
and monetary policy. It seems that China will 
post a large government deficit once again.3 In 
addition, the People’s Bank of China reacti -
vated a liquidity provision programme for state- 
owned banks at the turn of the year. The min -
imum reserve ratio was also lowered markedly. 
This represented, not least, the central bank’s 
response to consumer price inflation, which re -
mained exceptionally sluggish. In January, con -
sumer prices were actually noticeably below 
their level from the previous year. The core in -
flation rate excluding energy and food per -
sisted just barely in positive territory, at 0.4%.
Other selected emerging 
 market economies
In the final quarter of 2023, India’s economy is 
unlikely to have maintained its high pace of 
growth from the preceding quarters. A damp -
ener in industry is likely to have been a key fac -
tor in this development. In the services sector, 
by contrast, surveys among purchasing man -
agers suggest that the boom continued. The 
good consumer sentiment was probably attrib -
utable, in part, to the fact that consumer price 
inflation was recently back within the target 
corridor set by the Reserve Bank of India. In 
January 2024, consumer price inflation fell to 
5.1%. The core inflation rate excluding energy 
and food decreased to 3.5%. The central bank 
left its policy rate unchanged at 6.5%.
The Brazilian economy is likely to have re -
mained weak in the final quarter of 2023. Al -
though industrial output rose noticeably com -
pared with the previous quarter, surveys show 
that growth in the services sector was once 
again subdued. Against this backdrop, there 
was a distinct decline in consumer confidence, 
and retail sales fell slightly in price- adjusted 
terms. One contributing factor to this was the 
still fairly strong rise in consumer prices. Fol -
lowing the surge in energy prices last summer, 
the rate of inflation fell slowly, reaching 4.5% by January 2024. By contrast, further progress 
was made in reducing underlying inflation. 
Against this backdrop, the Central Bank of Bra -
zil lowered its policy rate by a total of 150 basis 
points over three steps from the beginning of 
November to 11.25%.
Russia’s war economy is likely to have held up 
quite well until recently, but appears to be in -
creasingly reaching supply- side limits. Accord -
ing to initial official estimates, economic output 
increased by 3.6% in 2023 as a whole. In the 
final quarter of 2023, domestic demand is likely 
to have continued to benefit from the sharp 
expansion in defence spending. The shortage 
of intermediate goods in industry that prevailed 
during the first few months of the war appears 
to have largely subsided and is no longer im -
pairing production to any significant degree. 
Western sanctions are being circumvented 
through deliveries from China and other neigh -
bouring countries. The labour market is faced 
with much greater bottlenecks. In particular, 
the shortage of skilled workers, in conjunction 
with an extremely low unemployment rate of 
around 3%, made itself increasingly apparent. 
Accordingly, the already strong wage growth Further easing in 
economic policy
India pauses for 
breath
Brazil remains 
weak, policy 
rate loweredRussia’s econ -
omy showing 
signs of over -
heating at the 
end of 2023Real GDP in China
Sources:  China  National  Bureau  of  Statistics,  Haver  Analytics 
and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 202390951001051101151201251301352019 = 100, log scale, seasonally adjusted
Pre-pandemic trend
(2015 to 2019)
3 China’s high levels of private and government debt har -
bour considerable macroeconomic risks that could also spill 
over to the German economy. For more information, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
15

The economic impact of shipping disruptions in the Red Sea
The maritime route through the Red Sea 
and the Suez Canal is one of the world’s 
most important trade routes.1 Since No-
vember 2023, Yemen’s Houthi rebels have 
been attacking cargo ships in the region. 
Owing to these attacks, shipping traffi   c on 
the route has fallen by around one- half.2 
Many shipping companies are currently 
opting instead for the route around the 
southern tip of Africa, which takes 10 to 20 
days longer.
As a result, global spot rates for chartering 
containers on cargo ships have increased. 
Since November 2023, the Freightos Baltic 
Index has almost tripled. This was mainly 
due to increases on the routes between 
Asia and Europe, which have seen freight 
rates climb by up to 350%. Shipping rates 
on other routes have risen much less 
strongly, however. To date, there has also 
been barely any reaction in terms of rates 
for new charters of container ships and 
freight rates for other forms of transport, 
such as bulk cargo, oil and gas tankers, or 
air freight.Diverting trade fl  ows from the Red Sea to 
the longer route around Africa is likely to 
exert only a small impact on global produc-
tion. Since the COVID- 19 pandemic, global 
shipping capacity has been expanded sig-
nifi  cantly, and international trade is, in any 
case, muted due to the prevailing economic 
conditions at present. This means that sup-
ply bottlenecks – such as those occasionally 
being seen in Germany in connection with 
the escalation of the situation in the Red 
Sea – are likely to subside quickly once en-
terprises adjust their procurement and pro-
duction plans. Furthermore, surveys among 
purchasing managers do not yet point to 
any broad- based increase in delivery times. 
The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index, 
which is compiled by the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York and combines a large 
number of indicators, has not signalled any 
unusual tension in global supply chains so 
far.
The impact on global consumer price devel-
opments is also likely to be limited. First, 
despite the marked rises in prices, spot rates 
for container freight are still well below the 
peaks that were seen in the wake of the 
pandemic. Second, the average transport 
costs for container freight are likely to have 
risen far less sharply than spot rates, as 
freight capacity is often booked through 
1 The route through the Red Sea is used by around 
30% of global shipping container traffi   c and for just 
under 15% of all European imports; see S&P Global 
(2023). It is also of great importance for the inter-
national energy trade, with 12% of the world’s total 
seaborne- traded oil and 8% of the world’s total 
seaborne- traded liquefi  ed natural gas passing through 
the Bab el- Mandeb strait; see U. S. Energy Information 
Administration (2023).
2 See UN Global Platform and PortWatch (2024).International container freight rates
50100200400600800January 2020 =100, weekly data, log scale
2020 2021 2022 2023 24
Sources: Baltic Exchange, Harper Petersen Holding, Haver Ana-
lytics, LSEG and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Spot rates for new 
charters of container ships. 2 Freightos Baltic Index. Spot rates 
for new charters of 40' containers on 12 major trade routes. 
3 Start of Houthi attacks on shipping in the Red Sea.
Deutsche BundesbankHARPEX 1
FBX: Global 2FBX: China/East Asia
to North Europe
3Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
16

continued to pick up. Against this backdrop, 
consumer price inflation rose further over re -
cent months, climbing to 7.4% in January. Core 
inflation was similarly high, at 7.2%. In light of 
the growing supply- side bottlenecks, the Bank 
of Russia warned of the risks of overheating 
and raised its policy rate to 16%.
United States
The US economy saw brisk growth at the end 
of the year. According to initial estimates, real 
GDP grew by 0.8% on the quarter in seasonally 
adjusted terms, rounding out a year with high 
GDP growth overall. The main driver of this was 
domestic demand. Rising real incomes and the 
persistently robust labour market bolstered con -
sumer sentiment among households, which in -
creased their consumption significantly again in 
the autumn. In addition, a noticeable contribu -
tion to GDP growth was once again made by 
government consumption and investment. Pri -vate investment in non- residential construction, 
which, partly owing to fiscal support, had seen 
strong growth during the past two years, con -
tinued to expand markedly at the end of 2023.4 
In this cyclical environment, investment in ma -
chinery and equipment as well as in housing 
construction also increased slightly, despite un -
favourable financing conditions. The upswing in 
the US economy could lose some momentum 
this year if fiscal policy is potentially more re -
strictive.5 A looming government shutdown 
from the beginning of March would likely have 
only minor macroeconomic repercussions.6Brisk GDP 
growthlonger- term contracts.3 Furthermore, goods 
that are not transported by container are 
barely affected at all. Transport costs also 
generally account for only small shares of 
the fi  nal prices of goods.4
The risk to consumer prices and global eco-
nomic activity would be much greater if the 
confl  icts in the Middle East were to spread 
to the oil- producing countries in the region. 
This could signifi  cantly drive up oil, gas and 
consumer prices as well as jeopardise the 
global disinfl  ation process.
3 For example, Stumpner (2022) shows that the aver-
age transport costs for container freight rose by 64% 
between January 2019 and December 2021, while 
spot rates rose by around 700% over the same period.
4 On the basis of the World Input- Output tables, the 
ECB estimates that shipping costs make up less than 
1% of the total cost of manufacturing output; see 
European Central Bank (2021).Global supply chain indicators
21012345
––+++++Seasonally adjusted, monthly data
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 24
Sources: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, S&P Global and 
Haver Analytics. 1 Zero corresponds to the historical mean of 
the index. 2 Inverted scale; values higher than 50 correspond 
to shorter delivery times and values lower than 50 correspond 
to longer delivery times.
Deutsche Bundesbank35
40
45
50
55NY Fed Global Supply Chain Pressure Index1
Standard deviations
Global Manufacturing PMI: 
Suppliers' delivery times2
Index points
4 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023).
5 The Fiscal Responsibility Act of 2023 of May 2023 limits 
discretionary spending to a level below that of 2023; see 
Congressional Budget Office (2023). The preliminary 
budget for the current fiscal year is very close to meeting 
these requirements. However, a sufficient majority in Con -
gress has not yet been found for the specific details of the 
budget.
6 Past government shutdowns only marginally dampened 
GDP growth. Following the end of a potential shutdown, 
rapid normalisation and, to a limited extent, catch- up ef -
fects would be expected. See Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2019).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
17

Against the backdrop of robust domestic activ -
ity, consumer price inflation in the United States 
declined more slowly in recent times. The an -
nual rate of the consumer price index (CPI) fell 
only slightly in the autumn. In January, it stood 
at 3.1%. Core inflation excluding energy and 
food hardly declined at all and stood at 3.9%. 
Wage growth and employment growth, which 
both remain strong, could make the disinflation 
process more difficult going forward. The US 
Federal Reserve System therefore left its policy 
rate unchanged.
Japan
Japan’s economic output contracted once 
again in the final quarter of 2023. According to 
initial estimates, GDP declined by 0.1% in sea -
sonally and price adjusted terms over the third 
quarter. Above all, domestic economic activity 
remained listless. Against the background of 
persistently high inflation, there was a slight decline in private consumption. Gross fixed 
capital formation continued on its downward 
trajectory. Exports, by contrast, picked up 
somewhat more briskly again. Imports also 
continued to rise. Despite the weak economic 
developments, the labour market improved. 
The unemployment rate fell to 2.3%. Con -
sumer price inflation declined further to 2.6% 
in December. By contrast, core inflation per -
sisted at 2.8%. In light of this, the Bank of 
Japan maintained its monetary policy stance.
United Kingdom
The economic downturn in the United King -
dom continued. Initial estimates show that, in 
the autumn, real GDP fell by 0.3% over the 
preceding period after seasonal adjustment. 
Activity in the manufacturing sector and in con -
struction contracted to an especially note -
worthy degree. Services output also declined 
further. This was particularly true of consumer- 
related sectors such as trade. Despite the 
broad- based downturn, business sentiment dif -
fered from sector to sector at the end of the 
period under review. In particular, an improved 
outlook in the services sector raised the Pur -
chasing Managers’ Index for the economy as a 
whole above the expansion threshold. At the 
same time, labour market tightness eased 
somewhat. In line with this, there was a slow -
down in wage growth. The year- on- year rate 
of the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 
(HICP) fell to 4.0% in January. The unemploy -
ment rate most recently remained at 5.1%. The 
Bank of England left its policy rate unchanged 
in December and January.
Poland
According to the flash estimate, economic out -
put in Poland remained unchanged in the au -
tumn. On average over the year, economic 
growth totalled 0.2%. This was – with the ex -
ception of 2020, when the COVID-  19 crisis 
broke out – Poland’s weakest year of macro -Slower decline 
in consumer 
price inflation
Economic out -
put decreasing 
once againDeclining GDP 
growth
Upswing 
remains muted, 
inflation still 
persistent US labour market indicators
Sources:  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  
Atlanta and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Seasonally adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2021 2022 2023 24100200300400500600700800Three-month moving averages
34567Average 1990 - 2019
Atlanta Fed Wage Growth Tracker 
of median hourly wages
Year-on-year changeEmployment growth
Month-on-month change1
%Thou.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
18

economic growth since its economic transition 
during the 1990s. Overall, however, the econ -
omy appears to have recently overcome the 
burdens resulting from inflation. Industrial out -
put rose markedly in the autumn. There was 
also a distinct increase in retail sales in price-  
adjusted terms. One reason for this was the re -
newed rise in household purchasing power 
given the declining inflation, high rate of em -
ployment, and strong wage increases. The un -
employment rate fell back to 2.7% in Decem -
ber, and gross average wages rose by 9.6% on 
the year. Consumer price inflation decreased to 
6.2%. By contrast, the core rate excluding en -
ergy and food persisted at 6.9%. The Polish 
central bank has therefore refrained from fur -
ther interest rate cuts since mid- October and 
left its policy rate at 5.75%.
Macroeconomic trends in the 
euro area
Economic activity in the euro area remained 
weak in the fourth quarter of 2023. According 
to Eurostat’s flash estimate, GDP stagnated in 
price and seasonally adjusted terms. Economic 
output also remained virtually unchanged com -
pared with the same quarter of the previous 
year. On an annual average, real GDP still rose 
slightly compared with 2022, largely driven by 
catch- up effects following the pandemic.
At the end of the year, the economic slow -
down was broadly spread across sectors, al -
though it continued to have the strongest im -
pact on the manufacturing sector. Neverthe -
less, the labour market situation remained fa -
vourable. The unemployment rate continued to 
hover at an all- time low. The macroeconomic 
outlook is still subdued. It appears that weak 
global trade, geopolitical uncertainty and the 
impact of tighter monetary policy are continu -
ing to weigh on activity, further delaying the 
anticipated economic recovery.
Once again, private consumption is likely to 
have expanded only moderately in the final quarter. Households’ purchasing power in -
creased somewhat in the context of rising la -
bour income and easing price pressures. Con -
sumer confidence also brightened slightly over 
the course of the quarter. Despite this, retail 
sales fell again in price- adjusted terms, and the 
number of new motor vehicle registrations de -
clined. The saving ratio was probably still sig -
nificantly above its pre- pandemic level.
Investment is likely to have fallen, having stag -
nated in the previous quarter.7 Construction in -
vestment probably declined substantially. In 
any case, construction output continued to 
drop in October and November. The rise in 
financing costs had an impact on housing con -
struction in particular. The number of residen -
tial building permits fell significantly by the Euro area eco -
nomic activity 
persistently 
weak Private con -
sumption still 
lacklustre
Investment 
decliningReal GDP in selected industrial countries
Sources: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Cabinet Office of Japan, 
Office for National Statistics, Statistics Poland and Bundesbank 
calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021 2022 20239095100105110Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, log scale
United KingdomUnited States
9095100105110
9095100105
PolandJapan
7580859095100105
7 Excluding Ireland. For several years now, the statistical 
recording of investment as a whole, and of investment in 
intellectual property in particular, has been strongly influ -
enced by the strategic activities of multinational enterprises 
in that country. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2018).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
19

third quarter. Investment in machinery and 
equipment probably also went down. Capital 
goods producers’ domestic sales decreased 
perceptibly in October and November after 
price adjustment. By contrast, investment in in -
formation and communication technologies 
and intellectual property is likely to have ex -
panded further owing to the trend towards 
digitalisation.
In the final quarter of the year, euro area coun -
tries’ exports of goods to third countries ex -
panded again markedly for the first time in a 
long while. Alongside the weak euro, this was 
probably due to the slight increase in foreign 
demand. In addition, there was probably some 
degree of normalisation after the especially 
weak second and third quarters. According to 
balance of payments data, exports of services 
probably also rose. Buoyed by vibrant activity in 
tourism, they had performed significantly bet -
ter than trade in goods over the course of the year. Imports of goods from third countries fell 
significantly in the fourth quarter.
The slowdown in the manufacturing sector 
continued. Consumer goods production and 
the production of intermediate goods fell 
markedly. Energy- dependent sectors such as 
the chemical industry showed the first signs of 
a bottoming- out in this regard, and motor ve -
hicle production also recovered somewhat. 
European Commission surveys suggest that the 
sluggish industrial activity was due mainly to a 
lack of domestic and foreign demand. Enter -
prises were also concerned about their com -
petitiveness. By contrast, factors limiting pro -
duction owing to a shortage of materials and 
labour have become less relevant in the mean -
time. Above and beyond that, price pressures 
at the producer level eased considerably. Pro -
ducer and import prices fell significantly on the 
year, mainly owing to falling energy prices but 
also to declining prices for intermediate goods. 
Capacity utilisation continued to decrease be -
tween October and January, standing slightly 
below its long- term average.
The services sector continued to deteriorate in 
the fourth quarter. Only the information and 
communication sector is likely to have con -
tinued to expand, albeit at a slower pace. By 
contrast, activity in the hotel and restaurant 
sector and in some business- related services 
appears to have declined after showing strong 
growth in the preceding quarters. According to 
the European Commission’s surveys, demand 
shortages played an increasingly important role 
here, too. In addition, a growing number of 
enterprises cited financial reasons as a factor 
limiting their business activities.
In most euro area Member States, the eco -
nomic situation remained subdued in the 
fourth quarter. Even so, economic growth in -
creased markedly in several Member States. 
The main factors that produced this mixed pic -
ture were differences in households’ purchas -
ing power and the strength of the stimulus Decline in trade 
in goods with 
third countries 
comes to an 
endWeak industrial 
activity …
… and further 
deterioration in 
services
Considerable 
differences 
between 
Member  StatesFactors limiting production
0102030405060Percentage of surveyed firms1
2015 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 2024
Sources:  European  Commission,  business  and  consumer  sur-
veys. 1 Multiple answers possible.
Deutsche BundesbankInsufficient demand
Shortage of labour
Shortage of material (industry) or 
equipment / space (services)
ServicesIndustry
0102030405060Financial constraintsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
20

provided by public infrastructure projects. 
Moreover, the lull in the manufacturing sector 
affected different countries to varying degrees. 
It had a particularly strong impact in Germany.8
According to a preliminary estimate, real GDP 
in France stagnated again in the fourth quarter. 
The French economy thus moved sideways in 
the second half of 2023. Nonetheless, growth 
for 2023 as a whole comes to 0.9%. In the 
fourth quarter, domestic final demand, in par -
ticular, fell off markedly compared with the 
previous quarter. Investment was significantly 
curtailed and private consumption also de -
clined somewhat. Imports were down substan -
tially. By contrast, exports remained broadly un -
changed following the decline in the previous 
quarter. Inventory changes made a significantly 
negative contribution to growth. On the out -
put side, industrial production increased some -
what, while service providers’ activity stag -
nated. The construction sector recorded an -
other substantial decline.
Macroeconomic activity in Italy increased 
slightly at the end of 2023. According to pre -
liminary data, real GDP increased by 0.2% after 
rising by 0.1% in the previous quarter. Real GDP 
grew by 0.7% for the year as a whole. Exports, 
which are likely to have expanded markedly, 
provided the main impetus in the final quarter. 
Imports probably declined, as they had done in 
the previous quarter. Weak domestic demand 
weighed on economic activity, by contrast. In -
vestment activity is likely to have fallen again, 
partly as a result of tighter financing condi -
tions, and private consumption will probably 
only have stagnated despite the easing of infla -
tionary pressures. On the output side, both in -
dustrial production and service providers’ activ -
ity picked up somewhat.
In Spain, economic activity, which has been ex -
panding for several quarters now, remained 
brisk in the fourth quarter. According to a pre -
liminary estimate, real GDP rose by 0.6% on 
the quarter. Economic output rose by 2.5% in 
2023 as a whole. Growth was driven by a slight increase in private consumption and a surge in 
exports, particularly of goods. By contrast, in -
vestment activity fell markedly in price- adjusted 
terms, with machinery and equipment record -
ing a much steeper decline than construction. 
On the output side, activity in the manufactur -
ing, information and communication services 
and business services sectors increased signifi -
cantly.
Portugal and Cyprus also posted strong growth 
in economic output, while Belgium and Slo -
vakia saw another moderate increase. In the French economy 
stagnates again
Slightly stronger 
growth in Italy
Economic 
activity  in Spain 
continues 
upward trendAggregate output in the euro area
Sources: Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021 2022 2023Real GDP, Q4 2019 = 100,
seasonally and calendar adjusted, log scale
80859095100105
105
758085909510080859095100105
Italy
SpainEuro area
France859095100105
of which:
8 For more details, see pp. 43 ff.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
21

Netherlands and Austria, real GDP picked up 
again somewhat after a prolonged period of 
weakness. The economic situation in the Baltic 
countries and Finland remained tense, although 
Latvia, at least, saw economic output rise again 
somewhat. In Ireland, real GDP fell for the fifth 
consecutive quarter.
The labour market situation in the euro area 
remained upbeat in the fourth quarter of 2023. 
Unemployment stayed at its low of 6.4%, and 
the number of people in employment rose 
again markedly. So far, the weak economy has 
mainly been reflected in a slight deterioration 
in the employment outlook. According to Euro -
pean Commission surveys, labour shortages in 
industry and among service providers eased 
but remained high by long- term standards. This 
is consistent with the fact that the share of 
firms that employ workers although they do 
not need them directly is markedly higher than 
its long- term average.9 Wage growth is likely to 
have been comparatively high in the fourth 
quarter, too, at between 4% and 5% on the 
year. Given stagnating labour productivity, 
wage cost pressures thus remained consider -
able.
In the final quarter of 2023, consumer prices in 
the euro area rose only slightly. The HICP in -
creased by a seasonally adjusted 0.3% on the quarter, its most modest increase since 2020. 
One key factor here was the decline in energy 
prices, which had still been on the rise in the 
third quarter. Inflation also eased significantly 
in other areas, but remained noticeable for 
food and services.
Year- on- year price dynamics in the euro area 
remained high, although the HICP rate almost 
halved compared with the third quarter, at 
2.7%. Around one- third of the decline is attrib -
utable to reductions in energy prices. At 9.8%, 
the annual growth rate fell even deeper into 
negative territory. By contrast, prices for food 
and other goods still rose by around 7% and 
2.9% on the year, respectively. However, infla -
tion continued to recede here too, partly be -
cause the rise in prices at the upstream stages 
came to a halt. Inflation also declined in the 
services sector, but remained high at just over 
4% compared to the previous year. Ongoing 
wage pressures contributed to this. The core 
inflation rate excluding energy and food there -
fore proved much more persistent than the 
headline rate, falling merely from 5.1% to 3.7%. 
The HICP rate averaged 5.4% in 2023 following 
8.4% in 2022. The core rate, by contrast, 
climbed from 3.9% to 4.9%.
Eurostat’s estimate put euro area inflation at 
2.8% in January 2024, 0.1  percentage point 
lower than in December. Data on short- term 
movements in key components of the HICP 
were not yet publicly available at that time.10 
However, preliminary data for the sub- indices 
suggest that the annual growth rates for pro -
cessed food and non- energy industrial goods 
fell slightly. By contrast, the annual inflation 
rate remained unchanged for services, but rose 
slightly for unprocessed food and energy. Like 
the headline rate, the core rate, at 3.3%, was 
0.1 percentage point lower than in the previous 
month. The disinflation process could lose a lit -Marked differ -
ences between 
smaller euro 
area countries, 
too
Labour market 
situation 
remains upbeat
Inflation 
declined mark -
edly in Q4Inflation rate 
excluding 
energy still high
According to the 
flash estimate, 
price dynamics 
in January 
remained high 
for services, in 
particularContributions to the euro area
inflation rate (HICP)
Sources: Eurostat, ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021 2022 202320246810
–+++++Year-on-year change, quarterly data
Food
Services
Non-energy 
industrial goodsEnergy
HICP (%)Contributions in percentage points
9 According to the European Commission’s new labour 
hoarding indicator. For technical details, see European 
Commission (2023).
10 The HICP weights for 2024 will only be published along -
side the final January figures.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
22

tle momentum over the next few months. En -
ergy prices probably moved sideways and con -
sumer goods prices did not fall further at the 
upstream stages. Moreover, the high wage 
growth is likely to continue for a while, which 
should be particularly noticeable in the services 
sector.
The cyclical weakness in the euro area is likely 
to continue in the current quarter. Leading indi -
cators promise only marginal economic growth 
at best. According to European Commission 
surveys, sentiment in the manufacturing sector 
trended sideways, remaining significantly 
below its long- term average. In the case of ser -
vice providers, it recently improved somewhat, 
slightly exceeding the long-  term average once 
more in January. Consumer confidence re -
mained depressed despite some improvement. 
Nevertheless, aggregate activity is likely to pick 
up over the course of the year. The dampening 
effect of the tighter monetary policy stance 
should gradually diminish, with gains in pur -
chasing power stimulating private consump -
tion. Global trade is likely to gather momentum 
as demand for industrial goods picks up again 
in the advanced economies. However, this out -
look is contingent on a lack of new disruptions, 
for example those stemming from heightened geopolitical tensions. In this respect, future de -
velopments remain highly uncertain at the mo -
ment; this in itself is a factor curbing economic 
activity.No fundamental 
cyclical improve -
ment in the 
short term
List of references
Congressional Budget Office (2023), CBO’s Estimate of the Budgetary Effects of H. R. 3746, the 
Fiscal Responsibility Act of 2023, Letter to Kevin McCarthy, 30 May 2023, https://www.cbo.gov/
system/files/2023-05/hr3746_Letter_McCarthy.pdf
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024), Risks facing Germany as a result of its economic ties with China, 
Monthly Report, January 2024, pp. 11-30.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023), The construction boom in the US semiconductor industry, Monthly 
Report, August 2023, pp. 15f.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019), The macroeconomic effects of the government shutdown in the 
United States, Monthly Report, February 2019, pp. 14-15.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), Activities of multinational enterprise groups and national economic 
statistics, Monthly Report, October 2018, pp. 65-78.Sentiment indicators for the euro area
80604020020
––––+
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 24
Sources: European Commission and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank–80–60–40–200+20Deviation from the long-term average, monthly data, 
seasonally adjusted
Industry: output expectations 
for the next three months
Services: demand expectations 
for the next three months
2002040
–++ Construction: current order backlogDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
23

European Central Bank (2021), What is driving the recent surge in shipping costs?, Economic 
Bulletin , Issue 3/ 2021, pp. 26-32.
European Commission (2023), A new survey- based labour hoarding indicator, European Business 
Cycle Indicators: 2nd Quarter 2023, European Economy Technical Paper, No 066, pp. 20-29.
International Energy Agency (2024), Oil Market Report, February 2024.
International Monetary Fund (2024), World Economic Outlook Update: Moderating Inflation and 
Steady Growth Open Path to Soft Landing, January 2024.
S&P Global (2023), Red Sea maritime risk likely to extend beyond Israel- Hamas war, alternative 
routes entail economic or operational compromises, Supply Chain Strategic Report, 21 December 
2023.
Stumpner, S. (2022), How much have rising transport costs affected US import prices?, Banque de 
France, Publications and statistics: Current economic developments, 11 May 2022, https://www.
banque-france.fr/en/publications-and-statistics/publications/how-much-have-rising-transport- 
costs- affected-us-import-prices
UN Global Platform and PortWatch (2024), https://portwatch.imf.org /, accessed on 15 February 
2024.
U. S. Energy Information Administration (2023), Red Sea chokepoints are critical for international 
oil and natural gas flows, Today in Energy, 4 December 2023.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
24

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
At its monetary policy meetings in December 
2023 and January 2024, the ECB Governing 
Council decided to keep its three key interest 
rates unchanged. The interest rate on the de -
posit facility, which is currently the most signifi -
cant for money market rates, thus remains at 
4%. The interest rates on the main refinancing 
operations and the marginal lending facility 
stand at 4.5% and 4.75%, respectively. In De -
cember, the Governing Council noted that, 
whilst inflation had fallen in the preceding 
months, it would be likely to pick up again 
temporarily in the near term. According to the 
December projections for the euro area, infla -
tion is expected to decline gradually over the 
course of 2024 before approaching the 2% tar -
get in 2025. Overall, the projections now see 
headline inflation averaging 2.7% in 2024, 
2.1% in 2025 and 1.9% in 2026. Compared 
with the projections from September 2023, this 
represents a downward revision for 2024. 
Underlying inflation also continued to decline. 
However, domestic price pressures remained 
elevated, primarily owing to strong growth in 
unit labour costs. At its meeting in January, the 
ECB Governing Council noted that the incom -
ing data since December broadly confirmed its 
assessment of the medium-  term inflation out -
look.
On the basis of its assessments from December 
and January, the ECB Governing Council con -
tinued to hold that the key interest rates are at 
levels that would make a substantial contribu -
tion to the timely return of inflation to the tar -
get. For this to happen, however, the key inter -
est rate levels would have be maintained for a 
sufficiently long duration. The Governing Coun -
cil will continue to follow a data- dependent 
approach to determining the appropriate level 
and duration of restriction. In particular, inter -
est rate decisions will continue to be based on assessments of the inflation outlook, the dy -
namics of underlying inflation, and the strength 
of monetary policy transmission.
In December 2023, the ECB Governing Council 
also decided to advance the normalisation of 
the Eurosystem’s balance sheet. It intends to 
continue to reinvest, in full, the principal pay -
ments from maturing securities purchased 
under the pandemic emergency purchase pro -
gramme (PEPP) during the first half of 2024. 
Over the second half of the year, it plans to 
reduce the PEPP portfolio by €7.5 billion per 
month on average and to fully discontinue the 
reinvestment of redemptions by the end of 
2024.
The euro short- term rate (€STR) has remained 
unchanged overall in the reporting period since 
mid- November, as no further interest rate hikes 
have been agreed. It stood most recently at 
3.907% and thus remained around 10 basis 
points below the deposit facility rate.
Across the board, market participants continue 
to believe that the interest rate on the deposit 
facility has peaked at 4%. The Eurosystem’s 
Survey of Monetary Analysts conducted ahead ECB Governing 
Council leaves 
key interest rates 
unchanged
Future interest 
rate decisions 
continue to 
follow  data- 
dependent 
approachECB Governing 
Council 
announces 
reduction in 
PEPP reinvest -
ments
€STR unchanged 
overall
Key ECB interest rates and money 
market interest rates in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Monthly averages. • = Average 1 to 9 February 
2024.
Deutsche Bundesbank2021 2022 2023 20241012345
–+++++% p.a.
Marginal lending rate
€STR1Main refinancing rate
Deposit facility rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
25

Money market management and liquidity needs
In the reporting period from 1 November 
2023 to 30 January 2024,1 excess liquidity 
in the Eurosystem decreased by a total of 
€91.9 billion to an average of €3,495.5 bil-
lion, though it remained at a high level. The 
decline was driven mainly by voluntary early 
repayments and maturing securities under 
the third series of targeted longer- term refi  -
nancing operations (TLTRO III) as well as the 
decrease in the outstanding volume under 
the asset purchase programmes.
Compared with the sixth reserve mainten-
ance period of 2023 (September- October 
2023), liquidity needs in the euro area stem-
ming from autonomous factors (see the 
table below) fell by €106.4 billion to an 
average of €1,433.1 billion in the eighth re-
serve maintenance period of 2023 (Decem-
ber 2023- January 2024). Without this 
liquidity- providing effect, excess liquidity would have contracted even more sharply. 
On the one hand, the decline in govern-
ment deposits of €54.3 billion (of which 
€8.8 billion in Germany) was the main fac-
tor behind the drop in liquidity needs. On 
the other hand, the combined total of net 
foreign assets and other factors, which are 
considered together owing to liquidity- 
neutral valuation effects, rose by €54.1 bil-
lion. In this context, the liquidity- absorbing 
effect stemming from other factors de-
creased as a result of a decline in the non- 
monetary policy deposits contained within 
these factors (-€18.1 billion) in the Euro-
system over the entire period under review. 
However, in Germany in particular, there 
Factors determining banks’ liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2023 2023/24
1 Nov.
to
19 Dec.20 Dec.
to
30 Jan.
I. Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors
1. Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) +  3.6 –  5.6
2. Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) + 28.6 + 25.7
3. Net foreign assets 1 +  2.1 + 25.0
4. Other factors 1 +  8.0 + 19.0
Total + 42.3 + 64.1
II. Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1. Open market  operations
a) Main refi  nancing operations –  0.8 +  0.6
b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations – 19.5 – 99.7
c) Other operations – 52.9 – 28.2
2. Standing facilities
a) Marginal lending facility –  0.1 +  0.1
b) Deposit facility (increase: –) + 28.6 + 61.4
Total – 44.7 – 65.8
III. Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I. + II.) –  2.6 –  1.5
IV. Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) +  0.7 +  1.6
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp. 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report . 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank1 Here, the averages of the eighth reserve mainten-
ance period of 2023 (December 2023- January 2024) 
are compared with the averages of the sixth reserve 
maintenance period of 2023 (September- October 
2023).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
26

was an increase in deposits held by foreign 
central banks in December 2023, which is 
common at the end of the year. On account 
of seasonal factors, the volume of bank-
notes in circulation in the Eurosystem rose 
slightly by €2.0 billion to €1,556.8 billion, 
absorbing liquidity. In Germany, net bank-
note issuance increased by €5.4 billion to 
€918.2 billion. Over the period under re-
view, the minimum reserve requirement in 
the Eurosystem fell by €2.2 billion to 
€162.3  billion, marginally decreasing the 
need for central bank liquidity. Since 20 Sep-
tember 2023, minimum reserves held with 
the Eurosystem have been remunerated at 
0.00% instead of at the deposit facility rate. 
In Germany, the reserve requirement re-
mained almost unchanged at €44.7 billion. 
Of the central bank liquidity of euro area 
banks, 95% (96% in Germany) was held in 
the deposit facility.
The average outstanding tender volume in 
the euro area decreased by €119.4 billion to 
€404.2 billion during the reporting period. 
The maturity date for TLTRO III.6 and a vol-
untary early repayment option for 
TLTRO III.7-10 fell within the period under 
review, on 20 December 2023. A total of 
€98.9 billion matured and was repaid on 
that date. The volume under the regular 
main refi  nancing operations and three- 
month tenders remained low overall. How-
ever, there were temporary rises in the vol-
ume under the main tender at the end of 
TLTRO III.6 and, in particular, at the turn of 
the year. In Germany, the average outstand-
ing volume of all refi  nancing operations fell 
by €27.1 billion to €70.5 billion in the period 
under review. This was partly due to ma-
turities and voluntary early repayments 
under the TLTRO III operations in December, 
amounting to €19.4 billion. German banks’ 
share in the outstanding volume of Euro-
system refi  nancing operations thus came to 
around 17%, which was roughly 2 percent-age points lower than in the sixth reserve 
maintenance period of 2023.
The decrease in the asset purchase pro-
gramme (APP) portfolio had the greatest 
impact on the overall amount of securities 
held for monetary policy purposes. Since 
1 July 2023, reinvestments under the APP 
have been discontinued, while reinvestment 
in the pandemic emergency purchase pro-
gramme (PEPP) has remained unchanged. 
Overall, holdings of monetary policy assets 
decreased by €81.1 billion in the period 
under review. As at 9 February 2024, the 
balance sheet holdings of the asset pur-Eurosystem purchase programmes
€ billion
ProgrammeChange 
across the 
two reserve 
periodsBalance sheet 
holdings as at
9 Feb. 2024
Programmes with on-
going reinvestments 1
PEPP –  1.7 1,671.6
Completed programmes 
APP – 79.0 2,989.9
PSPP – 63.9 2,376.6
CBPP3 –  6.4 280.1
CSPP –  6.8 320.3
ABSPP –  1.9 12.9
SMP –  0.4 2.4
1 Changes due to maturities, reinvestments and amortisa-
tion adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankAutonomous factors in the Eurosystem*
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Liquidity-provid-
ing factors are preceded by a positive sign. Liquidity-absorbing 
factors are preceded by a negative sign. 1 Including end-of-
quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2021 2022 2023 241,8001,5001,20090060030003006009001,200
––––––++++€ billion, mean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period
Net foreign assets1
Banknotes in circulationOther
factors1Government deposits
with the EurosystemDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
27

chase programmes amounted to €4,663.9 
billion (see the table on p.  27) and thus 
maintained a high level.2 92% of the liquid-
ity provided by monetary policy instruments 
stemmed from purchase programmes and 
only 8% from refi  nancing operations.
As in the sixth reserve maintenance period 
of 2023, the unsecured euro short- term 
rate (€STR) recorded an average of 3.90%. 
The average volume of €STR was  equally 
stable, at €59.9 billion in the seventh reserve  
maintenance period of 2023 (November- 
December 2023) and at €58.3 billion in the 
eighth, breaking the slight downward trend observed in the previous reference periods. 
With a decline of 1.1 basis points at end- 
November, the impact on the €STR fi  xing 
was weaker than at the end of previous 
months. At 1.8 basis points, the end- of- year 
effect on €STR was comparable to previous 
years. Transaction volumes were compara-
tively high for the end of a year, at €44.0 
billion, despite a marked day- on- day de-
cline of €13.7 billion.
During the period under review, the spread 
over the deposit facility rate continued to 
decline for secured overnight transactions 
on Eurex Repo’s GC Pooling trading plat-
form amid increasing transaction volumes. 
ECB basket transactions were traded at 
averages of 3.94% and 3.95%, respectively, 
in the seventh and eighth reserve mainten-
ance periods of 2023. In the ECB EXTended 
basket, which has a broader selection of 
securities with lower rating requirements 
for concluding repo transactions, trading 
took place at an average rate of 3.97% dur-
ing the period under review. The gap be-
tween the two rates thus narrowed from 3 
basis points to 2 basis points in the eighth 
reserve maintenance period of 2023. Once 
again, turnover in both collateral baskets 
was up on the previous reporting period 
(ECB basket: €6.6 billion, ECB EXTended 
basket: €5.6 billion). Both the increase in 
rates and in trading volumes took place in 
the eighth reserve maintenance period of 
2023, despite the usual decline in turnover 
and interest rates during public holidays 
and at year- end.
2 In addition to the termination of reinvestments 
under the APP , holdings were also shaped by revalu-
ations and the smoothing of reinvestments under the 
PEPP .Deposit facility rate, money market rates 
and excess liquidity
Sources:  ECB,  Eurex  Repo  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
1 Central bank balance minus the minimum reserve require-
ment plus the deposit facility. 2 The last period displayed is still 
ongoing.
Deutsche BundesbankSep. Oct. Nov. Dec. Jan. Feb.
2023 20243.53.63.73.83.94.0
++++++Daily data
€ bn% p.a.
3,0003,5004,000 Excess liquidity1
Mean value for 
the reserve
maintenance period2ECB EXTended basket€STR
STOXX GC Pooling Overnight
ECB basketDeposit facility rate
0Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
28

of the January meeting, showed that partici -
pants expected to see a median initial rate cut 
of 25 basis points in June. For 2024 as a whole, 
they expect interest rate cuts totalling 100 basis 
points. Money market forward rates, too, are 
pricing in significant interest rate cuts and go 
beyond the expectations indicated in the sur -
vey: an initial cut of 25 basis points is partly 
priced in for April at present, and, for 2024, the 
money market forward curve shows expected 
interest rate cuts of more than 100 basis points.
Monetary policy asset holdings have continued 
to decline overall during the reporting period 
since mid- November 2023. This development is 
attributable to assets under the asset purchase 
programme (APP) that are maturing and not 
being reinvested. On 9 February, the stock of 
APP assets held by the Eurosystem amounted 
to €2,989.9 billion (a breakdown of these hold -
ings by individual asset purchase programme 
can be found on pp. 26 ff.). Asset holdings re -
ported under the pandemic emergency pur -chase programme (PEPP) came to €1,671.6 bil -
lion on the same day.
Excess liquidity has contracted since mid-  
November, falling by around €37 billion. At last 
count, it came to €3,511 billion. Additional final 
maturities and voluntary repayments under the 
third series of targeted longer- term refinancing 
operations (TLTRO III) contributed to this de -
cline. Maturing assets under the APP also 
caused excess liquidity to shrink further. In add -
ition, excess liquidity was influenced by the de -
velopment of the autonomous factors, too, 
which fluctuated particularly over the turn of 
the year (see the box on pp. 26 ff.).
Monetary developments in 
the euro area
The broad monetary aggregate M3 grew 
slightly again in the final quarter of 2023, fol -
lowing four consecutive quarters of contraction Money market 
forward rates 
and surveys indi -
cate expected 
interest rate cuts 
in 2024
Decline in asset 
holdings 
continues Renewed 
decline in 
excess liquidity 
Annual M3 
growth positive 
againOutstanding liquidity broken down by open market operation in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 The bar width corresponds to the length of the reserve maintenance period.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 202405001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,5004,0004,5005,0005,5006,0006,5007,0007,500€ billion
Main refinancing operations
Three-month tenders
Purchase programmesMean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period1
Third series of targeted longer-term refinancing op erations
(TLTRO III)
Second series of targeted longer-term refinancing o perations
(TLTRO II)
First series of targeted longer-term refinancing op erations
(TLTRO I)Pandemic emergency longer-term refinancing operations (PELTROs)
Additional longer-term refinancing operationsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
29

in the wake of monetary policy tightening. Its 
annual growth rate, which had stood at -1.2% 
at the end of September, increased to 0.1% by 
the end of 2023 (see the adjacent chart). In 
view of the persistently high interest rate differ -
ential between highly liquid deposits and other 
forms of investment, the money- holding sec -
tors continued to shift funds into higher-  
yielding investments. In contrast to the previ -
ous quarters, however, beyond this pure shift -
ing of financial assets, funds were channelled 
into higher- interest- bearing M3 holdings in the 
fourth quarter of 2023, which had a positive 
impact on monetary growth. On the output 
side, a marked recovery in lending to the do -
mestic private sector and a significant increase 
in the net external assets of the monetary 
financial institutions (MFI) sector contributed to 
the increase in monetary growth. The antici -
pated end of the monetary policy tightening 
cycle and the expectation of falling lending 
rates boosted non- financial corporations’ de -
mand for short- term loans, in particular. At the 
same time, the banks participating in the latest 
round of the Bank Lending Survey (BLS) re -
ported having barely tightened their lending 
policies any further in the final quarter of 2023.
In terms of money holdings, the shifts towards 
higher- interest- bearing M3 holdings continued 
during the fourth quarter of 2023 (see the 
table on p. 31). Households in particular and, 
to a lesser extent, non- financial corporations 
further reduced their stocks of overnight de -
posits in view of their continued very low inter -
est rates. At the same time, however, they ex -
panded their short- term time deposits to an 
even greater extent. In addition, demand also 
increased for marketable instruments included 
in M3, which are held primarily by financial cor -
porations. Overall, these adjustments resulted 
in M3 recording a net inflow for the first time 
since the summer of 2022. This was partly due 
to the fact that the yield spread between assets 
outside of M3 and the higher- interest- bearing 
M3 holdings narrowed as a result of the de -
cline in capital market yields.Ongoing reduc -
tion of overnight 
deposits in 
favour of short- 
term time 
depositsMonetary aggregates and counterparts 
in the euro area
Source:  ECB.  1 Adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation  as 
well as for positions arising from notional cash pooling services 
provided by MFIs. 2 Denoted with a negative sign because, per 
se,  an  increase  curbs  M3  growth.  3 Non-monetary  financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 4 Non-financial corpora-
tions and quasi-corporations. 5 Including non-profit institutions 
serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 20238642024681012
––––++++++
–4–20+2+4+6+8+10+12+14
02468
++++Year-on-year change,
end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjusted
M3 and counterparts
of which:
Loans to selected sectorsM3 and components
M3 – M2
M2 – M1
M1
Remaining 
counterpartsLonger-term 
financial liabilities2Net external assets
Credit to the private sector1
Financial corporations3
Non-financial corporations4
Households5Contribution of components 
in percentage points
Securities-based lending 
to general governmentPercentage
change
in M3
Percentage
change
in M3
Percentage change in loans
to the private sector1Contribution of counterparts
in percentage points
Contribution of sectors in percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
30

In addition to the increase in stocks of higher- 
interest-  bearing M3 investments, the money-  
holding sector also continued to invest in non- 
M3 forms of investment. Alongside long- term 
savings deposits, demand was particularly 
strong for long- term bank debt securities, the 
yields of which declined somewhat, but never -
theless remained attractive. Both forms of 
financing gained in importance for banks in the 
course of the gradual repayment of TLTRO III 
loans.
On the counterparts side, the largest contribu -
tion to monetary growth in the fourth quarter 
of 2023 was made by the net external position. 
According to the information currently avail -
able from the balance of payments statistics, 
this was mainly due to a further increase in the 
positive euro area current account balance. On 
the one hand, exports continued to grow, par -
ticularly to the United States and the United 
Kingdom. On the other hand, lower  commod -
ity prices led to a decline in imports in nominal 
terms. By contrast, non- banks’ securities trans -
actions with non- residents had a slight damp -
ening effect on monetary growth on balance.
In the fourth quarter, the MFI sector’s lending 
to domestic non- banks also showed a marked 
recovery over the weak preceding quarters. 
This was also especially true of banks’ lending business with non- financial corporations, which 
grew moderately on balance. Among the four 
largest euro area Member States, banks in 
France once again recorded the strongest net 
growth, while the contribution made by Ger -
man banks was only marginally positive. Lend -
ing by banks in Italy and Spain stagnated as 
well. In both countries, however, loans to non- 
financial corporations had declined during the 
preceding quarters – sharply, in some cases – 
meaning that credit growth appeared to re -
cover in net terms here, too. For the euro area 
as a whole, the annual growth rate of loans to 
enterprises, which had stood at 0.2% in the 
previous quarter, rose to 0.4% by the end of 
the year.
The expansion in lending mainly affected short- 
term loans with maturities of up to one year. 
Longer- term loans recorded significantly smaller 
inflows. The shift in demand towards short-  
term loans was probably enterprises’ response 
to the mounting signs of a turning point in 
euro area financing conditions. Against the 
backdrop of waning inflation dynamics, lend -
ing rates declined slightly in November and De -
cember for the first time since the start of the 
rate hiking cycle. Yields in the capital market 
even declined markedly as expectations of rate 
cuts in 2024 grew. Given the expectation of 
lending rates falling further, it thus seemed at -Investment also 
in non- M3 
assets
Monetary 
growth sup -
ported by con -
tinued rise in 
current account 
balanceMarked recovery 
in lending over -
all, particularly 
due to a signifi -
cant increase in 
loans to enter -
prises
Focus on short- 
term loans due 
to expectations 
of interest rate 
cutsConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Quarter-on-quarter change in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities Q3 2023 Q4 2023
Holdings against central government 2 –  29.1 5.4
Monetary aggregate M3 –   5.3 141.4
Components:
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) – 202.5 – 134.3
Other short-term deposits 
(M2-M1) 171.9 220.7
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) 25.3 55.0
Longer-term fi  nancial liabilities 90.5 70.4
Capital and reserves 23.4 –  10.1
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities 67.1 80.5Assets Q3 2023 Q4 2023
Credit to private non-MFIs 
in the euro area 7.9 60.4
Loans –  0.2 68.9
Loans, adjusted 1 – 11.7 75.3
Securities 8.1 –  8.5
Credit to general government 
in the euro area – 19.1 7.1
Loans 1.6 8.0
Securities – 20.7 –  0.9
Net external assets 128.1 169.7
Other counterparts of M3 – 60.8 – 20.0
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as well as for positions arising from notional 
cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 2 Including central government deposits with the MFI sector and securities issued by the MFI 
sector held by central governments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
31

tractive for enterprises to borrow additional 
funds initially for just a shorter period of time.
This is consistent with the fact that the euro 
area banks surveyed by the BLS reported a fur -
ther net decline in demand for loans to enter -
prises in the fourth quarter of 2023, particularly 
for longer- term loans. However, the decrease 
in demand was smaller than it had been in the 
three previous rounds of the survey. For the 
first quarter of 2024, the surveyed banks are 
not expecting a further fall in credit demand 
for the first time since mid- 2022. According to 
the BLS, credit standards for loans to enter -
prises were tightened on balance by only a few banks in the fourth quarter. This tightening was 
the weakest seen in two years and was also 
less than banks had planned in the previous 
quarter. Over the last two rounds of the survey, 
tightening particularly affected the real estate 
sector and primarily loans for commercial real 
estate. However, it can be assumed that the 
significant tightening of credit standards seen 
in some cases over the preceding quarters will 
continue to dampen lending overall.
Bank lending to households continued to stag -
nate in the fourth quarter. Among the four 
largest euro area Member States, bank lending 
to households increased in both Germany and 
France, but was once again weaker than in the 
previous quarter. Banks in Italy and Spain again 
recorded net outflows from their loan port -
folios, albeit to a lesser extent compared with 
the previous quarter. On balance, the euro area 
saw a marginal increase in lending, which was 
largely attributable to consumer credit. By con -
trast, the segment of loans for house purchase, 
which is much more significant in terms of 
holdings, made virtually no contribution to the 
aggregate in the reporting quarter.1 Loans cat -
egorised as “other lending” (including loans to 
sole proprietorships) also decreased markedly 
again. On aggregate, the annual growth rate 
of loans to households fell further to 0.3% by 
the end of the year.
The weak development of loans for house pur -
chase is consistent with the fact that the banks 
surveyed by the BLS reported a further decline 
in demand for this loan category in the fourth 
quarter. However, this decline was smaller than 
in the five previous quarters. According to the 
surveyed banks, the main reasons for the lower 
funding needs among households were the rise Barely any fur -
ther tightening 
of credit stand -
ards for loans to 
enterprisesStagnating lend -
ing to house -
holds, especially 
in the case of 
loans for house 
purchase
BLS indicates 
demand for 
housing loans 
down again …MFI loans to the private non-financial 
sector in the euro area*
20020406080100120140
–+++++++€ billion, 3-month accumulated flows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Adjusted for loan 
sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial  corporations  and 
quasi-corporations. 2 Also adjusted for positions arising from 
notional cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Including 
non-profit institutions serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank... France
... Italy... Spain
... Germanyof which: MFIs in ...
–200+20+40+60+80 To households3To non-financial corporations1
Total2
1 For the components of loans to households (loans for 
house purchase, consumer credit, and other lending), data 
adjusted for loan sales and securitisation (as has been the 
case for the aggregate since January 2003) are available 
since January 2022. The seasonally adjusted original series 
of loans for house purchase, which rose significantly in the 
quarter under review, recorded a very small outflow after 
adjustment for such securitisation effects (however, these 
effects have not been seasonally adjusted).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
32

in interest rates, the decline in consumer confi -
dence, the bleaker outlook in the housing mar -
ket, and the prospective development of house 
prices.
Banks’ lending policies are also likely to have 
further dampened credit growth. According to 
banks, credit standards for loans for house pur -
chase were barely tightened any further on bal -
ance. However, as in all loan categories, the 
restrictive adjustments over the past one and a 
half years probably continued to have an im -
pact on lending. As in previous rounds of the 
survey, banks cited increased credit risk, par -
ticularly with regard to economic conditions, as 
well as the subdued economic outlook, the 
bleaker outlook in the housing market, and the 
prospective development of house prices as the 
key reasons for the tightening.
German banks’ deposit 
and lending business with 
domestic  customers
Amid declining capital market yields, German 
banks’ deposit business with domestic custom -
ers increased markedly in the fourth quarter of 
2023, much like in the euro area as a whole. In 
Germany, too, mainly short- term time deposits 
were built up, with the largest contribution 
coming from households, which increased their 
balances to an even greater extent than in the 
previous quarters. At the same time, house -
holds continued to reduce their holdings of 
overnight deposits and short- term savings de -
posits. The main reason behind this develop -
ment is likely to have been the persistently high 
yield spread between these types of deposit 
and short- term time deposits remunerated at 
close to market rates (see the chart above). In 
addition, households also increased their hold -
ings of longer- term bank deposits, the remu -
neration of which became somewhat more at -
tractive than that of other forms of investment. 
Non- financial corporations likewise continued 
to build up short- term time deposits in the fourth quarter of 2023, albeit to a lesser extent 
than in the previous quarter.
In contrast to the developments in the euro 
area as a whole, German banks’ lending busi -
ness with domestic customers weakened mark -
edly again in the final quarter of 2023. This was 
due, first, to the fact that lending to the do -
mestic private sector recorded a net outflow, 
which was mainly attributable to financial cor -
porations distinctly scaling back their debt with 
domestic banks. Second, loans to the public 
sector recorded weaker inflows than in the pre -
vious quarter.
By contrast, lending to non- financial corpor -
ations moved almost sideways in the final quar -
ter of 2023. Developments in the individual 
maturity segments were once again heteroge -
neous. Unlike in the euro area, non- financial 
corporations further reduced their short- term 
bank loans on balance. By contrast, longer-  
term loans increased markedly in net terms. … and credit 
standards barely 
tightened further
Deposit business 
up noticeably
Lending business 
with non- banks 
weakens again
Lending to 
enterprises 
negative, but 
different devel -
opments in indi -
vidual maturitiesInterest rates on bank deposits
in Germany*
* Deposits  of  households  and  non-financial  corporations  ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics (volume-
weighted interest rates). Interest rate levels for overnight and 
savings deposits may also be interpreted as new business due 
to potential daily changes in interest rates.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 202310123
–+++% p.a., monthly data
–10+1+2+3+4Overall volume
New business... up to 2 years
... over 2 years
... up to 3 monthsSavings deposits redeemable at notice of ...
... over 3 monthsTime deposits with an agreed maturity of ...
Overnight depositsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
33

The shift in loans demand towards longer ma -
turities was encouraged by banks’ rate-  setting 
behaviour: banks in Germany lowered their 
interest rates on longer-  term loans perceptibly 
over the course of the quarter and raised inter -
est rates on short- term loans again slightly.
The overall weak growth in loans to non-  
financial corporations is likely to be a reflection 
of several factors. First, relatively high financing 
costs as well as subdued industrial and con -
struction activity in addition to the uncertain 
economic outlook continued to dampen credit 
demand. The banks surveyed as part of the BLS 
thus reported that credit demand had declined 
again in net terms in the fourth quarter of 
2023, albeit less sharply than in the previous 
quarter. The banks mainly attributed this fall in 
demand to the decline in financing needs for 
fixed investment and to the rise in the interest 
rate level.At the same time, banks’ tighter lending pol -
icies are also likely to be having a dampening 
impact on lending. Although the banks sur -
veyed by the BLS barely tightened their credit 
standards for corporate lending any further in 
net terms during the reporting quarter, the 
overall considerable tightening from the previ -
ous quarters is likely to be continuing to have a 
dampening effect on lending. In addition, the 
surveyed banks once again made their credit 
terms and conditions more restrictive overall. 
They mainly attributed the restrictive nature of 
their lending policies to their perception of ele -
vated credit risk, given the subdued economic 
situation and economic outlook, as well as to 
industry- specific and firm- specific factors.
Banks’ lending business with domestic house -
holds also stagnated in the fourth quarter. This 
was because households once again slightly re -
duced their demand for loans for house pur -
chase on balance and, at the same time, made 
noticeable repayments on their consumer 
credit and other borrowing. The weak demand 
in this loan category continues to be driven by 
high financing costs and elevated construction 
prices. However, according to the MFI interest 
rate statistics, interest rates on long- term loans 
for house purchase fell again for the first time 
at the end of the year and stood at 3.65% at 
the end of December.
By contrast, banks’ lending policies did not 
have any additional restrictive effect in the 
fourth quarter. Contrary to what banks had 
planned, credit standards for loans to house -
holds for house purchase remained unchanged, 
and credit terms and conditions were even 
eased somewhat. Banks attributed the easing 
of terms and conditions primarily to the intense 
competition.
By contrast, according to the BLS, credit stand -
ards for consumer credit and other lending to 
households were tightened slightly in the 
fourth quarter of 2023. At the same time, the 
banks surveyed by the BLS reported a slight re -
duction in demand, mainly on account of a de -Declining finan -
cing needs for 
fixed investment 
and higher lend -
ing rates as 
factors  behind 
weakening 
demandCredit standards 
barely tight -
ened, but credit 
terms and con -
ditions more 
restrictive
Growth in loans 
for house pur -
chase continued 
to weaken
Financing condi -
tions for hous -
ing loans less 
restrictive overall
Demand for 
consumer credit 
and other lend -
ing once again 
in declineMFI* lending and deposits in Germany
€ billion, 3-month accumulated fl  ows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
Item2023
Q3 Q4
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight – 46.3 – 10.4
With an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years 72.7 83.0
over 2 years –  0.7 4.5
Redeemable at notice of
up to 3 months – 29.0 – 26.6
over 3 months 8.3 9.1
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans 3.3 2.0
Securities 0.3 0.0
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 3.7 –  2.9
of which: to households 3 1.3 0.7
to non-fi  nancial 
 corporations 4 –  2.1 –  0.1
Securities –  2.5 –  0.7
* In addition to banks (including building and loan associations, 
but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions 
(MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter 
data, adjusted  for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Enter-
prises, households and general government excluding central 
government. 2  Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 3 In-
cluding non-profi  t institutions serving households. 4  Non- 
fi  nancial corporations and quasi- corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
34

Bank conditions in Germany
1 Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2 New business. According to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. 3 Ac-
cording to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit standards: difference between the number of respondents reporting “tightened consi-
derably” and “tightened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a per-
centage of the responses given; for margins: difference between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and 
“widened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage 
of the responses given. 4 Expectations for Q1 2024.
Deutsche Bundesbank16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 20241.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.09.5
–300+30+60–300+30
–300+30–300+30
2016 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 240.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.5
30030
–+
30030
–+Credit to non-financial corporations
% p.a. % p.a.
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%
Average loansChange in margins3 for ...
Change in margins3
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate 
    fixation of over one year 
    and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit2...
... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
4
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises2...
... consumer credit
1.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.5
... loans for house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 million
4... loans for house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase2 ...
... with an initial rate
    fixation of over ten years
Change in credit standards3
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards3 for ...
4... with an initial rate fixation of
    over five years ...Credit to households1
... with an initial rate fixation of
    up to one year ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
35

cline in households’ propensity to purchase. 
The upward trend in financing costs for con -
sumer credit, which was already comparatively 
expensive, came to an end.
Given the conditions in financial markets, Ger -
man banks reported virtually no change in their funding situations compared with the previous 
quarter. Only their access to deposits deterior -
ated.
The Eurosystem’s key interest rate hikes have 
had, overall, a positive impact on banks’ profit -
ability over the past six months. They were a 
drag on non- interest income, but net interest 
income improved markedly. For the next six 
months, banks expect the key interest rate de -
cisions to have a far smaller impact on their 
profitability than in the previous six months. 
Banks responded to new regulatory and super -
visory activities by continuing to strengthen 
their capital positions in 2023. Over the next 12 
months, banks expect risk- weighted assets to 
increase, especially for average- risk loans. In 
addition, they anticipate that changes in super -
visory and regulatory requirements will necessi -
tate a tightening of their credit standards across 
all loan categories. For banks under national 
supervision in Germany, this will probably re -
flect the implementation of the seventh amend -
ment to the Minimum Requirements for Risk 
Management (MaRisk). Since 1 January 2024, 
this has required mandatory compliance with 
additional and, in some cases, stricter require -
ments for loan origination and monitoring. It 
also includes guidelines on sustainability. For 
banks supervised by the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism (SSM), the ECB has set out equiva -
lent guidelines.
The banks do not see developments in excess 
liquidity held with the Eurosystem as having 
had any meaningful impact on their lending 
over the past six months. By their account, that 
is also unlikely to change in the next six months.Deterioration in 
German banks’ 
access to 
deposits
Banks expect to 
tighten their 
credit standards 
due to supervis -
ory and regula -
tory require -
ments
Developments in 
excess liquidity 
have no mean -
ingful impact on 
lending2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 202302468Year-on-year change, end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjustedLoans* by German banks to the domestic 
private non-financial sector
202468101214
–+++++++Non-financial corporations1
* Adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 2 Including non-profit in-
stitutions serving households.
Deutsche BundesbankHouseholds2
Other lending
Consumer credit
Loans for house purchaseTotal,
percentage changeLoan contributions 
in percentage pointsTotal,
percentage changeUp to 1 yearMaturity contributions in percentage points
Over 1 year and up to 5 years
Over 5 yearsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
36

Financial markets
Financial market 
environment 
Activity in the international financial markets 
was shaped by greater confidence among mar -
ket players that inflation in 2024 could globally 
recede faster than previously anticipated. In 
November and December 2023, they gradually 
revised their previous assessment that key inter -
est rates in many currency areas, such as the 
United States and the euro area, would remain 
at high levels for an extended period of time 
(“higher- for- longer” interest rate scenario), and 
instead assumed earlier and sharper key inter -
est rate cuts. Market participants’ adjustment 
of their expectations was mainly driven by a 
significant fall in energy prices and by their 
hopes that disinflation would progress more 
rapidly than previously expected. The US Fed -
eral Reserve also sent early signals that it would 
probably be able to lower policy rates in 2024. 
Following the Federal Open Market Committee 
(FOMC) meeting in December, Fed Chair Je -
rome Powell expressed the view that interest 
rates in the United States had reached their 
peak, and that key interest rate cuts could fol -
low in 2024. This contributed to an appreci -
ation of the euro against the US dollar. US infla -
tion was somewhat higher than expected in 
January, leading to a slight weakening of ex -
pectations of a cut in key interest rates. How -
ever, in view of the continued robustness of US 
macroeconomic data, emanating in particular 
from the labour market in the new year, invest -
ors’ confidence in a “soft landing” of the US 
economy, concurrent with a decline in infla -
tion, grew. In the euro area, some members of 
the ECB Governing Council indicated that they 
regard a cut in key interest rates in the summer 
as conceivable. Given the more optimistic infla -
tion expectations and a relatively subdued eco -
nomic outlook in the euro area, market partici -
pants anticipated significantly earlier and 
sharper key interest rate cuts than before. Both 
currency areas saw a significant decline in long- term nominal and real interest rates in this set -
ting – a development which, coupled with a 
sustained robust risk appetite on the part of 
market players, resulted in significant price 
gains for risky assets.
Exchange rates
The euro appreciated against the US dollar on 
balance from the end of the third quarter of 
2023. The main driver of this appreciation was 
firming expectations of a turnaround in US 
monetary policy. This view put pressure on the 
US dollar despite the expectation that key inter -
est rates would also be cut in the euro area. 
While, taken in isolation, the relatively stronger 
economic outlook for the United States sup -
ported the US currency in 2024 – for instance, 
when surprisingly good gross domestic product 
(GDP) and labour market figures were pub -
lished  – exchange rate developments were 
dominated by the expectation of an interest 
rate reversal in the United States in the near 
future, causing the euro to appreciate overall. 
At the end of the reporting period, the euro 
was trading at US$1.07, up 1.4% from its level 
at the end of September 2023.Expectations of 
declining infla -
tion and sharper 
key interest rate 
cuts weigh on 
yields
Euro up against 
the US dollar …
Implied key interest rate cuts until the 
end of 2024
Source: LSEG.
Deutsche Bundesbank– 125 – 100 – 75 – 50 – 25 0Euro area
United
States
Sweden
United
Kingdom
Canada
NorwayBasis points, derived from money market ratesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
37

The euro also appreciated against the yen on 
balance. This currency pair’s exchange rate was 
also largely driven by expectations regarding 
monetary policy in the respective currency 
areas. The Japanese currency has been under 
pressure since the tightening cycle began in the 
euro area, as the Bank of Japan has maintained 
a negative interest rate policy despite inflation 
rates also rising in Japan. The euro even reached 
a 15- year high of ¥164 in mid- November. The 
single currency did not weaken against the yen 
until the aforementioned expectations of im -
pending interest rate cuts emerged in the euro 
area and comments made by the Bank of Ja -
pan’s Governor Kazuo Ueda at the beginning of December were interpreted by market par -
ticipants to mean that Japan could be on the 
verge of normalising its monetary policy. How -
ever, a severe earthquake in western Japan at 
the beginning of the year contributed to mar -
ket participants lowering their expectations of 
monetary tightening in the near future. As a 
result, the euro appreciated again and stood at 
¥161 at the end of the reporting period. This 
represents a net gain of 2.0% since the end of 
September last year.
The euro depreciated slightly against the pound 
sterling. As against the US dollar and the yen, 
the euro depreciated markedly against the UK 
currency at the end of November as partici -
pants in the foreign exchange market priced in 
the prospect of interest rate cuts for the euro 
area in the near future. However, the euro re -
ceived temporary support from a set of eco -
nomic data published for the United Kingdom 
in December showing weak growth and sur -
prisingly low inflation. This fuelled the expect -
ation that the Bank of England could also cut 
interest rates sooner than previously assumed. 
At the end of the period under review, the euro 
stood at £0.86, which was 1.0% lower than at 
the end of the third quarter of 2023.
On a weighted average against the currencies 
of 18 major trading partners, the euro was vir -
tually unchanged (-0.1%). While it was primarily 
supported by its gains against the US dollar, the 
currency depreciated against the złoty and the 
Swiss franc on balance.
Securities markets
Bond market
With the exception of Japan, nominal sover -
eign bond yields declined significantly in the 
major currency areas from the end of the third 
quarter of 2023. An important reason for this 
was also the change in market participants’ ex -
pectations regarding interest rate develop -
ments. In this environment, yields on ten- year … and against 
the yen …… but down 
against the 
pound sterling
Euro virtually 
unchanged in 
effective terms
Yields on ten- 
year sovereign 
bonds down in 
euro area and 
United StatesExchange rate of the euro
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Calculated 
against the currencies of 18 countries. A rise in values indicates 
an appreciation of the euro.
Deutsche BundesbankS OND J FMAM J J A S OND J F
2022 2023 20240.951.001.051.101.15
135140145150155160165
0.840.870.90
9296100Daily data, log scale
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
... yen
... pound sterling
Nominal effective exchange rate1
Q1 1999 = 100Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
38

US Treasuries fell significantly to 4.3% over the 
reporting period. The GDP- weighted yield on 
ten- year euro area bonds fell even more sharply 
to 2.9%. This comparatively steep decline re -
flects, on the one hand, expectations of a less 
restrictive monetary policy and the gloomier 
economic picture in the euro area. On the 
other, spillover effects from the United States 
are likely to have played a role in this sharp de -
crease in yields, too. In any case, this is what a 
model- based analysis suggests that breaks 
down interest rate movements into the histor -
ical contributions of individual shocks.
In line with the yield on euro area bonds, yields 
on ten- year Bunds fell to 2.4%. The yield curve 
derived from yields on Federal securities shifted 
downwards almost uniformly during the period 
under review. The continued inversion of the 
yield curve, which is regarded as an empirical 
signal of market expectations that a recession 
will occur over the next 12 months, is therefore 
consistent with the gloomy economic outlook.1 
An estimated yield curve for real yields on Fed -
eral securities shows that real yields likewise fell 
during the period under review, especially in 
the long- term maturity segment. This indicates 
an expansionary impulse and, taken in isol -
ation, more favourable financing conditions.
Yields also fell in the United Kingdom and in 
other countries such as Canada and the Scandi -
navian countries, owing to market participants 
expecting a largely global disinflation process. 
In the United Kingdom, the yields on ten-  year 
gilts fell by 48 basis points to 4.1% in the period 
under review. Yields on ten- year Canadian and 
Swedish sovereign bonds declined to a similar 
extent, while the decrease in Norwegian sover -
eign bond yields was somewhat smaller. In 
Japan, the Bank of Japan signalled that it be -
lieved the likelihood of achieving the inflation 
target of 2% sustainably was gradually increas -
ing. At the same time, it maintained its very 
loose, and most recently somewhat more flex -
ible, monetary policy of yield curve control, 
with the aim of keeping long- term yields close 
to 0%.2 In this environment, yields on ten- year Japanese sovereign bonds remained virtually 
unchanged.
Yield spreads on euro area sovereign bonds 
narrowed further in view of market partici -
pants’ increased hopes that there would be a 
rapid fall in key interest rates. Amid lower real 
interest rates and a significant increase in risk 
appetite, spreads on bonds issued by highly in -
debted governments, in particular, fell visibly. 
The ECB Governing Council’s announcement 
that it would gradually reduce reinvestments 
under the pandemic emergency purchase pro -
gramme (PEPP) over the second half of 2024 
had no impact on the downward momentum 
of yield spreads. This was due, in part, to the 
fact that the pace proposed by the Eurosystem Decline in yields 
on ten- year 
Bunds
Global disinfla -
tion weighs on 
yields in other 
countriesEuro area yield 
spreads 
narrower Historical decomposition of ten-year 
German Federal bonds
Sources: LSEG and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Based on a VAR 
model with sign restrictions (see Brandt et al., 2021). Estima-
tion period: January 1999 to August 2023.
Deutsche BundesbankOct. Nov. Dec. Jan. Feb.
2023 2024100806040200204060
–––––+++Cumulated change since 30 September 2023 in basis points,
daily data
Global risk appetite
US macroContribution of shocks1
Change in yield 
on ten-year
German Federal bondsUS monetary policy
Euro area macroEuro area monetary policy
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023).
2 The Bank of Japan recently loosened its yield curve con -
trol policy somewhat: at the end of July 2023, it raised the 
ceiling on ten- year sovereign bond yields by 50 basis points 
to 1%. At the end of October 2023, it decided that it 
would no longer apply this value as a rigid cap, but rather 
as a reference rate and thus more flexibly.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
39

for the reduction in PEPP bond holdings fell 
short of market participants’ expectations. On 
balance, the yield spreads of ten- year Greek 
and Italian sovereign bonds over Bunds with 
the same maturity decreased by 38 and 42 
basis points, respectively, from the end of Sep -
tember 2023. Overall, the yield spreads of ten- 
year sovereign bonds issued in the euro area 
over Bunds narrowed by 15 basis points (GDP- 
weighted average).
Short- term inflation expectations based on in -
flation swaps fell significantly in the period 
under review. Market participants now expect 
annual inflation rates of 2.2% and 2.0% for 
2024 and 2025, respectively, thus close to the 
Eurosystem’s stability mark. At the end of Sep -
tember, they were still forecasting rates of 
2.7% for 2024 and 2.3% for 2025. This was 
mainly due to energy prices falling on balance, 
which had a dampening effect overall on the 
market- based inflation path for 2024. Statistical 
office publications also revealed surprisingly lower current inflation rates than expected, 
contributing in part to market participants ad -
justing their inflation outlook downwards. The 
markets are currently pricing in a somewhat 
faster return to the price stability objective than 
experts indicate in their survey responses. Ex -
pectations of comparatively sharper key inter -
est rate cuts, which are based on market data 
(see p. 29), are thus in line with the expect -
ations of a stronger decline in inflation.
Market- based inflation compensation for the 
euro area for a horizon of between five and ten 
years likewise fell (by around 0.3 percentage 
point to 2.3%) in the period under review, 
while survey- based inflation expectations for 
this period remained unchanged at 2.0%. 
Taken together, this suggests that although 
market participants have become more confi -
dent regarding the future development of infla -
tion, they continue to believe there are greater 
upside than downside risks to inflation devel -
opments in the euro area over medium to 
longer- term horizons.
In the United States, the short- term market-  
based inflation outlook has also improved due 
to the downward trend in energy prices. 
Longer- term inflation indicators have fallen, 
too. However, actual inflation and the market- 
based inflation outlook on the other side of the 
Atlantic are still well above the Fed’s target of 
2%. Relatively robust US economic data, which 
represent an upside risk to the inflation process 
in the United States, are likely to have contrib -
uted to this.
Yields on BBB- rated European corporate bonds 
and high- yield bonds with residual maturities 
of between seven and ten years fell signifi -
cantly in line with the decline in risk- free inter -
est rates. Within this rating category, bond 
yields of financial corporations fell more sharply 
than those of non- financial corporations. Given 
the noticeably higher risk appetite, yield spreads 
over Bunds with the same maturity also nar -
rowed in both the BBB segment and, above all, 
in the high- yield segment. Thus, measured by Market partici -
pants expect 
inflation to fall 
rapidly to 2% by 
the end of 2024Market partici -
pants continue 
to hedge 
against long- 
term upside risks 
to inflation
Inflation expect -
ations in the 
United States 
down, but still 
elevated
Corporate bond 
yields down 
significantly Expected annual average inflation rate 
for the euro area for 2024
Sources:  Fenics,  Consensus  Economics,  Bloomberg  and 
Bundesbank calculations. 1 Average of the monthly inflation 
fixing swaps due in 2024 indexed to the HCIP excluding to-
bacco for the euro area.
Deutsche BundesbankJ FMAM J J A S OND J F
2023 20241.82.02.22.42.62.83.0
Memo item:
Crude oil price
US$ per barrel
707580859095100Consensus
inflation expectations
(monthly)% p. a.
Inflation swaps1
Time of the survey or time the data were recordedDaily dataDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
40

yield spreads, financing costs for European en -
terprises in all rating categories are currently 
close to or below their respective five- year 
averages. This is noteworthy given that these 
average values have been shaped not only by 
the coronavirus pandemic and the war in 
Ukraine, but also by quantitative easing and 
the effective lower bound regime.
Equity market
The international equity markets were charac -
terised by the decline in risk- free interest rates 
and investors’ increased appetite for risk, which 
boosted prices considerably. In the United 
States, prices were also supported by many in -
vestors’ expectations of a “soft landing” for the 
US economy. Market participants interpreted 
signs of a stable economy, such as robust la -
bour market data, as a factor weighing on 
equity prices in some cases, due to concerns 
that favourable economic signals could prevent 
the Fed from cutting interest rates quickly. Ul -
timately, however, these concerns proved to be 
short- lived, especially since the robust macro -
data were also reflected in higher earnings ex -
pectations that supported equity prices. Even 
intermittent concerns about an escalation of 
the geopolitical situation in the Middle East ul -
timately had no visibly dampening effect on 
equity prices. Shares in technology companies, 
which have a high weighting on the US equity 
market, recorded above- average price gains. As 
a general rule, investors in these companies ex -
pect favourable long- term prospects, meaning 
that they benefit in particular from lower risk-  
free interest rates. Moreover, some technology 
companies were boosted by investors’ hopes of 
advances in the use of artificial intelligence (AI). 
Among these companies were manufacturers 
of computer chips with the high computing 
capacities required for AI programmes.
The decline in risk- free interest rates and the 
robust appetite for risk likewise fuelled signifi -
cant equity price gains in the euro area. How -
ever, these gains were lower than those re -corded in the United States. One important 
reason for this was the comparatively unfavour -
able economic outlook, which was reflected in 
downward revisions of earnings expectations, 
dampening the upward trend in equity prices. 
On balance, the prices of European equities 
(EURO STOXX) and German equities (CDAX) 
have risen by 10.8% and 9.1%, respectively, 
since the end of the third quarter of 2023. 
Equity prices in the United Kingdom (FTSE 100) 
remained virtually unchanged (-0.1%), as some 
commodity stocks included in the index 
weighed on price developments. By contrast, 
US equities (S&P 500) and Japanese equities 
(Nikkei index) posted gains of 17.3% and 
19.8%, respectively.
Some European and US bank stocks recorded 
strong price gains in the period under review. 
The prices of US bank stocks were clearly 
buoyed by growing confidence that the US 
economy could be heading for a “soft landing” 
rather than a recession. On balance, the prices International 
equity markets 
with noticeable 
price gains
Equity price 
gains in Europe 
lower than in 
the United 
StatesBanks on both 
sides of the 
Atlantic record 
gainsForward inflation rates* and expectations 
in the euro area and the United States
Sources: Bloomberg, LSEG, Consensus Economics and Bundes-
bank calculations. * Derived from the fixed cash flow arising 
from inflation swaps which is swapped for the actual annual 
inflation rates (HICP excluding tobacco for the euro area and 
CPI Urban Consumers for the United States) realised over the 
next five or ten years. 
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 2022 2023 241.41.82.22.63.0% p.a., weekly averages
Five-year forward inflation rate in 
five years derived from swapsConsensus inflation 
expectations in six 
to ten years
United StatesEuro area
0.81.21.62.02.42.8Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
41

of European and US bank stocks rose by 6.2% 
and 25.0%, respectively, as compared with the 
end of September 2023.
US equity valuations have remained nearly con -
stant since the end of the third quarter of 2023, 
while valuations for European equities have 
risen slightly, as indicated by the decrease in 
earnings yields and the implied cost of equity 
of European equities. The implied cost of equity 
is derived from a dividend discount model that 
also takes into account enterprises’ medium-  
term earnings outlook and the path of risk- free 
interest rates. In view of the diverging eco -
nomic outlook on either side of the Atlantic, 
the regions’ medium- term earnings prospects 
developed differently. Analysts revised their 
forecast for European enterprises somewhat 
downwards, which had a dampening effect on 
share price developments. Meanwhile, they 
raised their forecast for US enterprises. In a 
long- term comparison, the implied cost of 
equity and, in particular, the equity risk premia 
indicate a relatively high valuation for European 
and US equities overall.Slight rise in 
equity market 
valuations
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023), Term structures in economic analysis, Monthly Report, January 
2023, pp. 53-74.Equity market
Sources: LSEG Datastream and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche BundesbankBank indicesBeginning of 2020 = 100, log scale, daily data
Total market indices
6580100120140160
506080100120140
2020 2021 2022 2023 24Euro area
(EURO STOXX)Japan
(Nikkei 225)United States
(S&P 500)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
42

The German economy
Macroeconomic situation
German economic output shrank in the fourth 
quarter of 2023. According to the Federal Stat -
istical Office’s flash estimate, real gross domes -
tic product (GDP) fell by a seasonally adjusted 
0.3% on the quarter after virtually stagnating 
in the first three quarters.1 Industry continued 
to be impacted by weak foreign demand. 
Higher funding costs remained a drag on in -
vestment and thus on domestic demand for in -
dustrial goods and construction work. More -
over, uncertainty about climate and transform -
ation policy is likely to have dampened invest -
ment. In addition, inclement weather 
constrained construction activity. Further pres -
sure was placed on economic activity by the 
relatively high sickness rate. By contrast, lower 
inflation, the robust labour market and strong 
wage growth supported real private consump -
tion. However, consumers probably remained 
cautious in their expenditure.
Economic activity in detail
Seasonally adjusted industrial output declined 
significantly in the fourth quarter of 2023. The 
decline affected most sectors, except for the 
manufacture of motor vehicles and other trans -
port equipment. Order intake has been weak 
for some time now, and is likely to be a notable 
factor increasingly impacting on output. Sur -
veys by the ifo Institute show that the share of 
manufacturing firms reporting a shortage of 
orders has risen steadily since April 2023, 
reaching 37% at the end of the period under 
review. By contrast, supply bottlenecks con -
tinued to ease according to ifo surveys. Weak 
foreign demand was also reflected in real ex -ports of goods, which declined further in the 
fourth quarter.
Higher financing costs remained a drag on in -
vestment. Business investment in machinery 
and equipment is likely to have fallen signifi -
cantly in the fourth quarter, as signalled by the 
steep decline in the price- adjusted sales of cap -
ital goods producers in Germany. Real imports 
of capital goods also saw a sharp drop. Enter -
prises invested less in their vehicle fleets. Ac -
cording to data from the German Association 
of the Automotive Industry (VDA), commercial 
passenger car registrations were down consid -
erably. One factor that is likely to have played a 
role in this was the end of the environmental 
bonus for commercial owners at the end of 
August 2023.German GDP 
shrank in Q4 
2023
Weak demand 
for industrial 
goods reflected 
in production 
and exportsHigher financing 
costs and end of 
environmental 
bonus damp -
ened business 
investment in 
machinery and 
equipment
Aggregate output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Price 
and calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 20239698100102104106108
–12–8–40+4+8+12Adjusted for price, seasonal and calendar effects
2015 = 100, log scale
Gross domestic product
% Lin scale
Year-on-year change1
1 Seasonal adjustment here and in the remainder of this 
text also includes adjustment for calendar variations, pro -
vided they can be verified and quantified. The flash esti -
mate also included some revisions for previous quarters.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
43

Construction investment probably declined sig -
nificantly in the fourth quarter. Seasonally ad -
justed construction output was substantially 
lower on the quarter, both in the main con -
struction sector and in the finishing trades. 
Higher interest rates continued to weigh on de -
mand for construction work. Averaged over 
October and November, order intake in the 
main construction sector saw a substantial 
drop compared with the previous quarter, leav -
ing it 17% down on its level in the fourth quar -
ter of 2021. According to ifo Institute surveys, 
the share of firms in the main construction sec -
tor reporting a shortage of orders continued to 
rise significantly in the last three months of the 
year. In addition, the high levels of precipitation 
are likely to have adversely affected construc -
tion activity.2 Surveys conducted by the ifo In -
stitute show that one- quarter of firms in the 
main construction sector reported that con -
struction activity was hampered by weather 
conditions in the final quarter.Private consumption is likely to have registered 
a slight increase in the fourth quarter. However, 
despite lower inflation, the robust labour mar -
ket and substantial wage growth, households 
remained cautious with their consumer spend -
ing. According to the market research institu -
tion GfK, consumers were unsettled by the 
geopolitical crises and conflicts, sharp rises in 
food prices and the debate about the govern -
ment budget.3 Price- adjusted sales in the retail 
sector once again declined somewhat. They 
were also down in the accommodation and 
food services sector, according to data avail -
able up to November. By contrast, households 
probably purchased considerably more cars, as 
indicated by private car registrations, which 
picked up substantially according to data pro -
vided by the German Association of the Auto -
motive Industry. Meanwhile, activity in the ser -
vices sector may have declined in the fourth 
quarter. According to data available up to No -
vember, services production (excluding trade) 
decreased. Trade in motor vehicles was prob -
ably also down. This is signalled by overall 
motor vehicle registrations, which declined 
markedly. The steep drop in commercial regis -
trations outweighed the increase in private 
registrations. Real wholesale sales also de -
creased, probably partly in reflection of the 
weak industrial activity.
Labour market
The protracted bout of weakness in the econ -
omy has had only a mild impact on the labour 
market so far. Despite a decline in economic 
output, employment increased slightly in the 
fourth quarter. While unemployment reached a 
somewhat higher level than in the third quar -
ter, the increase likely came to an end in the 
past two months. The number of job vacancies 
also stabilised recently, following an earlier de -
cline. The same applies to most leading indica -Higher interest 
rates and 
inclement 
weather  
weighed on 
construction 
output and 
construction  
investmentPrivate con -
sumption and 
activity in ser -
vices sector 
weak
Employment 
and unemploy -
ment both up 
slightly in Q4Output in industry and
in construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 202380859095100105110
1001051101151201251301351402015 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, 
quarterly data, log scale
MonthlyIndustry
Industry excluding 
automotive
Main constructionConstruction1
2 The fourth quarter of 2023 saw exceptional levels of rain -
fall. See Deutscher Wetterdienst (2024).
3 See GfK (2023).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
44

tors of the labour market. Thus, there are no 
signs that the weak economy will imminently 
cause the labour market to worsen noticeably. 
Nor are there any signs of a significant rise in 
employment and a concomitant decline in un -
employment from its slightly elevated level.
After the third quarter saw total employment 
stagnate, seasonally adjusted employment in -
creased marginally in the final quarter of 2023, 
by 28,000 persons or +0.1%. There were de -
clines in self- employment and exclusively low-  
paid part- time employment, contrasting with an 
increase in the number of jobs subject to social 
security contributions. According to the Federal 
Employment Agency’s initial estimates, which 
cover the period up to November, staff levels are 
still going up in areas of basic public services – 
human health and social work, the public sector, 
energy and water supply, and education and 
training. Fairly positive developments were also 
seen in employment among qualified business 
service providers and in transportation and stor -
age. Negative cyclical factors pushed down the 
number of temporary agency workers and of re -
tail and wholesale staff slightly. The manufactur -
ing and construction sectors saw a minimal dip 
in employment. Short-  time work for economic 
reasons remained at its slightly elevated level. 
However, registrations for short- time work give 
no indication of a distinct increase over the next 
few months.
Registered unemployment saw a slight uptick 
in the fourth quarter of 2023 as well. Looking 
at the quarterly average, the Federal Employ -
ment Agency recorded around 55,000 more 
persons as unemployed compared with the 
previous quarter, giving a seasonally adjusted 
total of 2.69 million persons. The unemploy -
ment rate climbed by 0.1  percentage point 
from the third quarter, to 5.8%. In January, un -
employment remained virtually unchanged, as 
was the case in December. This was primarily 
due to an improvement on previous months in 
the number of unemployed people covered by 
the statutory unemployment insurance scheme, 
which is affected by cyclical developments. Employment 
growth in some 
services sectors 
offset decline in 
manufacturing 
and trade
Further slight 
uptick in 
unemploymentLabour market
Sources  of  unadjusted  figures:  Federal  Statistical  Office  and 
Federal Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Ex-
cluding seasonal jobs.
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 24Jan.44.044.545.045.546.0
32.032.533.033.534.034.535.0–1,000–5000+500+1,000
2.22.42.62.83.0
–600–400–2000+200+400+600+800Jan.Seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
Jan.Million
Million
Million500700900Thousand
Thousand
Thousand
Year-on-year change1Registered unemployedUnemployedTotalEmployment
Enlarged scale
Unsubsidised vacancies2EmployedJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1
Oct.-
Nov.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
45

However, it would be premature to read this as 
good news for the economy, as weather condi -
tions may also have played a role in December 
and January especially.
The majority of leading indicators improved 
slightly in December and January. This suggests 
they have bottomed out after the labour mar -
ket outlook had deteriorated somewhat in the 
course of 2023. However, this does not yet in -
dicate that a wave of recruitment is imminent. 
The seasonally adjusted number of reported 
vacancies rose somewhat in December and 
January, marking the end of a slight decline 
spanning roughly 18 months in what remains a 
fairly high number of vacancies. In particular, 
the Federal Employment Agency has recently 
received more new job ads. It still takes a very 
long time for a vacancy to be filled. The em -
ployment barometer of the Institute for Em -
ployment Research (IAB) for the economy as a 
whole remains in positive territory and im -
proved a little. For this barometer, the IAB sur -veys regional heads of the employment agen -
cies about the local outlook over the next three 
months. This also includes employment devel -
opments in the services sectors benefiting from 
structural change, such as health and educa -
tion. However, the indicator of recruitment 
plans in trade and industry – which are more 
exposed to cyclical fluctuations – for the next 
three months, as derived from the ifo Institute’s 
monthly survey of around 9,000 enterprises, 
shows a negative balance and deteriorated fur -
ther in January.
The dynamics of future unemployment, as re -
flected in the transitions between unemploy -
ment and employment, improved in January 
for the first time in 18 months. In particular, 
unemployed people covered by the statutory 
unemployment insurance scheme stood a bet -
ter chance of finding a job. At the same time, 
the transition rate from employment to un -
employment remained close to its lowest level 
of the past 30 years, which was reached in 
2022. The probability of dismissal is thus still 
very low. The IAB survey on unemployment is 
no longer quite as deep in negative territory. 
The number of unemployed persons is there -
fore likely to stabilise in the coming months.
Wages and prices
In the fourth quarter of 2023, negotiated 
wages temporarily rose less sharply than in the 
third quarter. Including additional benefits, 
they were up by 3.6% on the year in the fourth 
quarter, compared with 4.7% in the quarter 
before. As in the first three quarters of 2023, 
large tax and social contribution- exempt infla -
tion compensation bonuses played a key role. 
Factoring out these one- off payments, negoti -
ated wages rose by 2.5% year on year in the 
fourth quarter, a distinctly slower increase than 
the 2.9% recorded in the third quarter.4 How -Most leading 
indicators of 
employment 
showing first 
tentative signs 
of improvementNumber of 
unemployed 
unlikely to see 
any further 
significant  rise
Weaker rise in 
negotiated 
wages in Q4, …2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023101234567
–+++++++Year-on-year change, on monthly basis
Percentage
points
–2–10+1+2+3%
Wage drift1Negotiated rates of payActual earningsRates of pay and wage drift
Sources:  Federal  Statistical  Office  (actual  earnings)  and 
Deutsche Bundesbank (negotiated rates of pay). 1 Wage drift 
is calculated as the annual change in the ratio of actual ear-
nings to negotiated rates of pay.
Deutsche Bundesbank
4 The higher increase in the third quarter was mainly due 
to the high inflation compensation bonus of €1,240 for 
Federal civil servants, which was paid out in September 
2023.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
46

House prices in Germany in 2023
House prices fell signifi  cantly in 2023, pri-
marily because credit- fi  nanced real estate 
was less affordable as a result of high infl  a-
tion and the interest rate hikes from the 
second half of 2022 onwards. Monetary 
policy tightening also reduced demand for 
housing. This meant demand increasingly 
shifted to the rental market, and the al-
ready high infl  ation in rents saw a signifi  -
cant further acceleration. The faltering ex-
pansion of supply helped prevent prices 
from falling even further. Overvaluations 
came down as prices fell in 2023. As a re-
sult, there is currently less downside poten-
tial than in previous years. However, as 
overvaluations are not yet fully eliminated, 
further corrections cannot be ruled out.1
According to data from the Association of 
German Pfandbrief Banks (vdp), the prices 
of owner- occupied housing fell by 4.1%. 
Averaged over the fi  rst three quarters of 
2023, the Federal Statistical Offi   ce’s price 
index fell much more sharply compared 
with the same period of the previous year, 
namely by 8.9%. Hypoport AG’s EPX price 
index for residential real estate declined by 
4.2% in 2023. All three indicators show a 
considerable decline in house prices.
According to calculations based on price 
data provided by bulwiengesa AG, house 
prices in the 127 German towns and cities 
fell by 4.5% last year, after having risen sig-
nifi  cantly by 6% in the previous year. In the 
seven major cities, the decline came to 
5%.2 The quarterly vdp data paint a similar 
picture, with house prices in the seven 
major cities falling by 5.3% in 2023 accord-
ing to this measure. Comparing the vdp 
data for major cities with those for Ger-
many as a whole confi  rms the impression 
gleaned from the previous upswing in prices – that the prices of residential real estate 
tend to move more quickly in metropolitan 
than in rural areas. Since the turning point 
in 2022, prices in towns and cities have 
come down more than in less populated 
districts. However, price measurement is 
currently subject to particularly high uncer-
tainty. In particular, the importance of prop-
erties’ energy effi   ciency in determining 
prices may have increased. The price 
changes reported may also refl  ect higher 
markdowns for properties with low energy 
effi   ciency.3
Unlike purchase prices, rents rose last year, 
with growth signifi  cantly stronger than in 
2022. According to vdp, the year- on- year 
rise in rents for new lettings in multi- family 
dwellings was 6.3%. This equates to a fur-
ther acceleration in rental infl  ation as com-
pared with previous years. According to cal-
culations based on data provided by bul-
wiengesa AG, rents for new lettings rose by 
5.5% in towns and cities. Rents in the seven 
major cities went up by almost 7%.
During 2023, much tighter fi  nancing condi-
tions and the only gradual decline in infl  a-
tion from a very high level weighed on the 
propensity to acquire residential real estate. 
However, after adjustment for infl  ation, 
households’ disposable incomes recovered 
over the course of the year. Population 
growth, which was buoyed by immigration, 
1 This box deals with the ramifi  cations of house price 
developments for the real economy. To assess them 
from a fi  nancial stability perspective, it is also necessary 
to consider aspects relating to housing loans.
2 The seven major cities are Berlin, Cologne, Düssel-
dorf, Frankfurt am Main, Hamburg, Munich and Stutt-
gart.
3 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a). This is the case, 
amongst other things, if the infl  uence of properties’ 
energy effi   ciency feeds into the index in a time- 
invariant manner.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
47

also helped prevent a stronger dampening 
of demand. Moreover, interest rates on 
loans for house purchase, although signifi  -
cantly higher, were no higher in the report-
ing year than in 2009 after adjustment for 
long- term infl  ation expectations. The damp-
ening of demand caused by monetary pol-
icy did contribute quite strongly to the de-
cline in house prices. However – given that 
demand came down from a very high 
level  – the reduced affordability of loan- 
fi  nanced residential property was a more 
decisive factor in bringing down prices. This 
is also likely to be one reason for the large 
increase in rental prices for new lets. Many 
potential buyers were probably forced to 
rent rather than buy, at least for the time 
being.
Supply grew even more slowly in 2023. The 
cost of construction materials rose sharply 
following very high growth in 2022, in part 
due to ongoing supply bottlenecks and 
shortages of building materials. In addition, 
wage costs in the construction sector in-
creased. Moreover, tighter fi  nancing condi-
tions hampered growth in supply. The num-
ber of completed housing units, which had 
stood at 295,000 in previous years, is likely 
to have declined in 2023 due to the excep-
tionally large number of cancellations.4 The 
number of building permits is also likely to 
have decreased sharply in 2023, to around 
270,000.
Overvaluations in towns and cities declined 
signifi  cantly in 2023.5 Estimations show 
that residential property prices in towns and 
cities were between 15% and 20% above 
the level that socio- demographic and eco-
nomic fundamentals would suggest is ap-
4 See ifo Institute (2023).
5 This development had already started to emerge 
during the course of 2023. See Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2023a).Price indices for housing
1 Weighted by transaction. Bundesbank calculations based on 
price  data  provided  by  bulwiengesa  AG.  2 Berlin,  Cologne, 
Düsseldorf, Frankfurt am Main, Hamburg, Munich and Stutt-
gart.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 232010 = 100, annual data, log scale
100110120130140160180200220240260
100110120130140 140160180200
100110120130140160 160180200220240
100110120130140160180200
Destatis house price indexHypoport AG composite indexvdp price index for
owner-occupied housingDeutsche Bundesbank1
Quarterlyof which:
7 major cities2Total
127 towns and citiesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
48

ever, this cannot be taken to imply a turn -
around towards lower negotiated wage in -
creases in the future, because the wage agree -
ments recently negotiated include zero months 
with no wage rises at the beginning of their 
terms. Subsequently, inflation compensation 
bonuses will be paid out with a time lag.5 There 
will then be significant, permanent wage in -
creases from the fourth quarter of 2024. All in 
all, the pay round settlements for 2024 and 
2025 envisage robust negotiated wage in -
creases.
The sharp growth in actual earnings in the pre -
vious ten quarters continued and is likely to 
have once again significantly outstripped the 
increase in negotiated wages in the fourth 
quarter of 2023. This is also indicated by the 
sharply higher nominal wage data available 
through to December 2023 from the Federal 
Statistical Office’s earnings survey. According to 
interim figures calculated on the basis of data 
from the national accounts, growth in actual earnings amounted to 6.1% in 2023, the high -
est rate since 1992.
The latest collective pay agreements delivered 
particularly strong wage increases. In annual -
ised terms, wages rose by 5.9% in the public 
sector of the Federal states, 4.8% in the steel 
industry and 4.0% in the wood and plastics 
processing industry.6 In the retail sector, as well 
as in wholesale and foreign trade, no new 
agreement has been reached in the negoti -
ations that have been dragging on since April 
2023. This dampened the rise in the 2023 ne -
… but con -
tinued strong 
growth in actual 
earningsLatest collective 
wage agree -
ments deliver 
strong increases; 
still no deal 
struck for tradepropriate.6 The decline was especially 
marked in the seven major cities. The price- 
rent ratio for housing units in towns and 
cities exceeded its longer- term average by 
around 20%. The aggregate price- income 
ratio was just over 20% above the refer-
ence value in 2023. The long- term relation-
ship between real estate prices, interest 
rates and incomes indicates overvaluations 
ranging from 10% to 15%.7 Overall, over-
valuations, though considerably reduced, 
are unlikely to have been brought down to 
zero. This means that there is still a certain 
risk of price corrections.
6 For details on the underlying panel estimation ap-
proach, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2020a).
7 For more details on the valuation approaches, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b).
5 In the case of the negotiated pay rises to be registered in 
the first few months of 2024, it matters when the inflation 
compensation bonuses are recorded in the statistics. For 
example, the inflation compensation bonus of €1,800 
agreed in mid- December 2023 in the public sector of the 
Federal states will not be paid out to wage earners until the 
first quarter of 2024 owing to official regulations.
6 For someone earning the agreed basic pay rate. Owing 
to base amounts and inflation compensation bonuses, the 
increase can be higher in lower pay grades and lower in 
higher ones. In the wood and plastics processing industry, 
the rise varies slightly depending on the region.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
49

gotiated wage index for the macroeconomy 
owing to the large number of zero months. Fu -
ture sector agreements could significantly raise 
wage growth rates in 2024.
The first few months of this year’s pay round 
for roughly 13 million wage earners (just under 
60% of salaried staff) will mainly see negoti -
ations in some services sectors and in the main 
construction sector. Attention switches to 
major industrial sectors such as the chemical in -
dustry as of May, followed by the metal indus -
try from summer onwards. Trade unions are 
still demanding very high wage hikes, with past 
real wage losses likely to be a factor in their 
demands: an increase of 12% over a 12- month 
term in the printing sector, a rise of 8.5% over 
a 12- month term in temporary agency employ -
ment, and a permanent monthly wage increase 
of €500 (around +13%) in the main construc -
tion sector. IG BCE, the trade union for mining, 
chemicals and energy, is recommending wage 
demands of +6% to +7% for negotiations in 
the chemical industry. It should be noted, how -
ever, that the latest collective wage agreement 
reached in the chemical industry has already 
exhausted the legal scope for inflation com -
pensation bonuses exempt from tax and social 
security contributions (limited to €3,000).7
Trade union demands for lasting improvements 
to real wages combined with widespread la -
bour shortages suggest that prospective new 
pay deals will be high. By contrast, weak eco -
nomic activity and the likely further easing of 
inflation could put something of a damper on 
the new pay increases being negotiated. Trade 
unions’ willingness to strike is likely to remain 
high given the real wage losses that have arisen 
over the past three years and have not yet been 
fully compensated for. Unions have achieved a 
higher percentage of their demands since 2022 
than in the previous 15 years. In the pay round 
settlements for 2023, and those on record for 
2024, increases in real wages often only came 
about thanks to the high inflation compensa -
tion bonuses. As calls are still being made for 
improvements to real wages, higher perman -ent negotiated pay increases might be agreed 
after the end of the year, which is when these 
special bonuses will expire. According to the 
aggregate profit margin indicator, profit mar -
gins in the third quarter of 2023 –  quarterly 
data are available up to this point – rose only 
marginally on the year in seasonally adjusted 
terms.8 Profit margins widened in the manufac -
turing sector and narrowed in the services sec -
tors. Aggregate profit margins increased by 3% 
compared with the first quarter of 2021. There 
were significant differences between the sec -
tors. Profit margins rose by just under 3% in 
manufacturing (excluding construction) and by 
around 30% in construction, but they were up 
by only 1% in the services sectors. The latter 
sectors are therefore likely to have built up less 
scope than in manufacturing to cushion the in -
tense wage cost pressures observed recently in 
some cases.
Effective from January 2024, the general statu -
tory minimum wage rose from €12 to €12.41 
per hour, a hike of 3.4%. This increase is having 
no significant impact on average wages in the 
economy as a whole, as it mainly affects lower 
wage brackets in low- paid jobs with very few 
spill- over effects on higher pay grades.
For the first time since the end of 2020, con -
sumer price inflation (HICP) was only marginal 
in the fourth quarter of 2023. On average 
across the months of October to December 
2023, consumer prices increased by only a sea -
sonally adjusted 0.2%, compared with a rise of 
0.7% in the previous quarter. This was mainly Major pay 
round for just 
under 60% of 
salaried staff
High wage pres -
sures expected 
in 2024 as wellMinimum wage 
increase to 
€12.41 with 
small aggregate 
wage effects
Disinflation pro -
cess continued 
in Q4 2023
7 The pay deal concluded in the chemical industry in mid- 
October 2022 was the first in a major sector to feature an 
inflation compensation bonus exempt from tax and social 
security contributions. As this deal exhausted the legal 
scope for inflation compensation bonuses, the next pay 
deal will no longer contain that component. Along with a 
reference to securing real wages in the long term, the high 
wage demands are backed up by an internal survey con -
ducted by the IG BCE trade union, which finds that three 
out of four salaried employees in the chemical industry are 
having to make cuts to their household budgets. Further -
more, 55% of them said that their personal economic situ -
ation is currently worse than it was one year ago.
8 The profit margin indicator corresponds to the ratio of 
the gross value added deflator to unit labour costs.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
50

Recent infl  ation developments in the light of a stylised 
macro model
In the fourth quarter of 2022, the infl  ation 
rate in Germany and the euro area reached 
all- time highs in excess of 10%. Although 
infl  ation rates have gone back down con-
siderably since then, they are still just shy of 
3%. In the academic and economic policy 
debate, a wide variety of possible explan-
ations have been ventured as to what 
caused infl  ation to rise following the sub-
siding of the COVID- 19 pandemic. Refer-
ence is made, amongst other things, to 
supply bottlenecks and commodity price 
shocks, but also to domestic factors such as 
excessively accommodative monetary and 
fi  scal policy in response to the COVID- 19 
pandemic.1,2
A broadly acclaimed contribution to the de-
bate on the triggers and determinants of 
the high infl  ation was made by Bernanke 
and Blanchard (2023), initially for the United 
States. For their research, they used a small 
stylised macroeconomic model of a closed 
economy, consisting of a price equation, a 
wage equation and an equation each for 
short- run and long- run infl  ation expect-
ations. At the core of the model are the 
interactions of infl  ation, wages and expect-
ations. The impacts of exogenous shocks 
can thereby be amplifi  ed. The authors fi  nd, 
in their estimates for the United States, that 
commodity price shocks and supply bottle-
necks triggered the rise in the infl  ation rate. 
Tight labour markets, through higher wage 
agreements, only contributed later, though 
with greater persistence, to price increases.3
The Bernanke- Blanchard model was applied 
to various euro area countries, Japan, the 
United Kingdom and Canada as part of an 
international working group. In this con-
text, the Bundesbank applied the model to Germany and the euro area (see Menz 
(2024)).4 As in the United States, the rise in 
infl  ation rates in the euro area is likewise 
attributable to energy and food price shocks 
and supply bottlenecks. The triggers for 
these shocks are not explained in the model 
itself. However, it stands to reason that sup-
ply and demand factors made a contribu-
tion. Granted, the high labour market util-
isation, which was due in part to supply 
and demand factors, led to high wage rises 
in the euro area, too. However, the price- 
driving effects this unleashed, according to 
the model, have thus far been somewhat 
weaker than in the United States. Owing to 
the interaction between prices, wages and 
infl  ation expectations baked into the model, 
the estimated impact of wages on prices 
contains second- round effects.5 Moreover, 
the model does not provide any evidence 
that the surprisingly high infl  ation rates in 
the past were refl  ected in additional wage 
demands to such an extent as to have led 
to an explosive wage- price spiral. To be 
sure, short- run infl  ation expectations re-
sponded to energy price shocks and current 
price surges, which also amplifi  ed wage 
1 Greater attention was also given to claims of “greed-
fl  ation”, according to which fi  rms took advantage of 
their market power and the particular circumstances of 
the post- pandemic era to raise their prices more 
strongly than would have been necessitated by cost 
pressures. However, there has so far been virtually no 
empirical evidence in support of this allegation.
2 For details and references to academic and eco-
nomic policy studies, see Menz (2024).
3 For a comparison of infl  ation developments in the 
United States and the euro area, see also Deutsche 
Bundesbank (2022).
4 The model is estimated econometrically as a struc-
tural VAR, which is extended to a panel approach for 
the euro area, incorporating country- specifi  c effects.
5 The transmission of wage growth to prices has not 
changed signifi  cantly in connection with the high infl  a-
tion rates of recent years. In Germany, it still stands at 
just over one- third. See e.g. Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2019c) and Bobeica et al. (2019).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
51

growth. However, short- run infl  ation ex-
pectations remained highly correlated with 
long- run infl  ation expectations. This an-
choring of infl  ation expectations has had a 
stabilising effect overall.
The model can be used not only to analyse 
the recent past but also to derive possible 
scenarios for movements in prices, wages 
and infl  ation expectations in the near fu-
ture. Assuming that labour markets grad-
ually ease and no new shocks occur in the 
commodity markets, the model assumes 
that infl  ation will gradually decline in the 
near future. The results for Germany are 
broadly in line with the Bundesbank’s infl  a-
tion forecast from December of last year, 
according to which the infl  ation rate in Ger-
many will not return to levels of just over 
2% until sometime during 2026 (see 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b)). By con-
trast, in the current model scenarios for the 
euro area, infl  ation returns more rapidly to-
wards the 2% mark than forecast by the 
Eurosystem in December (see European 
Central Bank (2023)).
By focusing on the interactions of prices, 
wages and expectations, the Bernanke- 
Blanchard model, on the one hand, makes an important contribution to the analyses 
of these key macroeconomic variables. On 
the other hand, it disregards a number of 
price- driving factors such as monetary pol-
icy, taxes and other fi  scal measures, but also 
specifi  c information on individual markets 
(such as weather effects or sector- specifi  c 
price- setting behaviour). However, these 
can be of crucial importance for a good 
forecast. In this sense, the scenarios of fall-
ing infl  ation rates should be understood as 
evidence in support of the downward- 
sloping but more detailed forecast paths in 
the Eurosystem’s projections. A precondi-
tion for the disinfl  ation process to be ex-
pected according to the Bernanke- 
Blanchard model actually occurring in the 
euro area is that the commodity markets 
are not hit by any new price shocks and 
that the labour market tightness is over-
come. Given the persistence of geopolitical 
uncertainties, further commodity price 
shocks, in particular, cannot be ruled out. 
The Bernanke and Blanchard model also 
suggests that, should such price- driving in-
fl  uences continue for longer, a timely return 
in the direction of the 2% mark will become 
more diffi   cult.Model-based decomposition of the inflation rate in Germany*
* Inflation rate calculated as the log annual change in the seasonally adjusted HICP.
Deutsche BundesbankQ4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
2019 2020 2021 2022 202320246810
–+++++Percentage points
Residual Lockdown
Food prices Energy prices
Labour market Supply bottlenecks
Productivity Initial condition
Inflation %Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
52

due to the sharp fall in energy prices. More -
over, prices for industrial goods excluding en -
ergy and services did not go up quite as strongly 
as in previous quarters. Food prices, mean -
while, rose at more or less the same rate as in 
the third quarter. The process of disinflation in 
the fourth quarter was evident in year- on- year 
terms as well, with the headline inflation rate 
falling significantly to 3.0% from a level of 
5.7% in the same quarter of the previous year. 
The sharp rise in energy prices in the final quar -
ter of 2022 had a dampening effect here, but 
the core inflation rate (HICP excluding energy 
and food) also dropped steeply, falling from 
5.8% to 3.6%.
The HICP rate dropped markedly in January as 
well, from 3.8% to 3.1%.9 This was mainly due 
to the elimination of the base effect from the 
2022 price- lowering Emergency Aid for Natural 
Gas Heating for End Consumers (Erdgas-  
Wärme-  Soforthilfe),  which had temporarily sig -
nificantly increased the December rate. Food and non- energy industrial goods inflation like -
wise eased considerably. By contrast, services 
saw strong price increases at the beginning of 
the year, especially in areas where prices are 
not administered. Rents went up at a faster 
pace and numerous insurance premiums be -
came more expensive. In addition, prices in res -
taurants and cafés recorded an extraordinary 
surge. One factor at play here was the expiry of 
the temporary VAT cut for meals eaten in cater -
ing establishments, even though the tax in -
crease was probably not passed through fully 
into consumer prices. Lastly, the national car -
bon price charged on fossil fuels went up. On 
balance, the core rate remained at 3.4% in 
January.
Inflation fell 
somewhat fur -
ther in January; 
core rate 
unchangedPrice developments at economic stages as classified for HICP purposes
–60–40–200+20+40+60+80+100Year-on-year percentage change
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
1 Eurostat. 2 Bundesbank calculations (in euro) based on daily prices in USD as quoted by Bloomberg Finance L.P. 3 Including bever-
ages and tobacco products.  4 ECB calculations of DG AGRI prices based on the European Commission’s farm-gate and wholesale mar-
ket prices. 5 Analogous to HICP classification “non-energy industrial goods”; Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal 
Statistical Office.
Deutsche Bundesbank10010203040
–++++
505101520
–++++
–20–100+10+20+30+40+50Crude oil price2 (right-hand scale)
HICP – food1,3Producer prices for food in the euro area4 (right-hand scale)HICP – energy1
3036912
–++++
–30+3+6+9+12
HICP – non-energy industrial goods1Industrial producer prices5
Jan.
9 The national CPI rate stood at 2.9%, down from 3.7%. In 
the case of the HICP , the January figures are also based on 
the routinely updated weights for 2024. Here, there were 
no major changes in consumer spending – compared with 
previous adjustments made over the pandemic period.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
53

The inflation rate will probably generally de -
cline further in the next few months. In some 
cases, strong fluctuations in the year- on- year 
rate are to be expected. This is due to some 
base effects in energy and local public trans -
port. Moreover, Easter falls earlier this year 
than last, which is relevant for package holiday 
prices. The main factor behind the disinflation 
process is the declining price dynamics in food 
and industrial goods. Here, weakening inflation 
has an impact on upstream stages. By contrast, 
price pressures in the services sector are likely 
to ease much more slowly in the coming 
months, partly because wage growth remains 
strong.Order books and outlook
Some headwinds will probably persist into the 
first quarter of 2024. Foreign industrial demand 
tended to decline significantly of late as well. 
Consumers are likely to remain cautious in their 
spending. Higher funding costs may continue 
to constrain investment. Additionally, uncer -
tainty regarding climate and transformation 
policy remains elevated. Disruptions to produc -
tion resulting from various strikes – including 
the rail and aviation strikes – cannot be ruled 
out, either. There are still orders on hand in in -
dustry and construction. However, they are 
dwindling. Economic output is thus likely to 
once again contract slightly in the first quarter 
of 2024. This second consecutive decline in 
economic output would put the German econ -
omy in a technical recession. While this would 
mean the ongoing period of weakness in the 
German economy following the start of the 
Russian war of aggression against Ukraine 
would continue, there is still no evidence of a 
recession in the sense of a persistent, broad-  
based and distinct drop in economic output 
and no such recession is expected, either.10 In 
particular, the income situation and thus house -
hold consumption are likely to continue to im -
prove in the future given the stable labour mar -
ket, sharply rising wages and the declining in -
flation rate.
Industry is still navigating choppy waters at the 
beginning of the year. Demand for industrial 
products remained weak.  December saw a 
sharp rise in industrial new orders on the month 
in seasonally adjusted terms, but this increase 
was attributable to large orders. Excluding this 
volatile component, new orders remained in 
significant decline. On an average for the 
fourth quarter of 2023, incoming orders lev -
elled off close to the level of the previous quar -
ter. Excluding large orders, both domestic and 
foreign demand for industrial products fell sub -
stantially. According to Federal Statistical Office 
data available up to November, the order books Disinflation pro -
cess expected to 
slow downEconomic out -
put could con -
tract again in 
Q1 2024
Industrial activ -
ity still weak at 
beginning of 
yearDemand for industrial goods and 
construction services
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023758090100110120
–30–150+15+30+45+60
100110120130140
–30–150+15+30Volumes, 2015 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, 
quarterly data
Log scale
Industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change1Lin scale
Year-on-year change1
Log scale
Main construction orders
%%Monthly
Total
Excluding large 
orders
10 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2019a and 2019b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
54

were still relatively well- filled. However, they 
have already shrunk considerably compared 
with the previous year. Short- term export ex -
pectations, along with production plans that 
deteriorated in January according to surveys by 
the ifo Institute, also suggest that industrial ac -
tivity will remain weak.
Consumers are likely to have significantly 
greater spending scope in the current quarter. 
Nevertheless, they are probably still holding 
back on their spending. The GfK consumer cli -
mate indicator deteriorated markedly again, 
with both the propensity to purchase and in -come and economic expectations declining. At 
the same time, the propensity to save increased 
significantly. Despite substantial growth in real 
incomes, private consumption is therefore likely 
to remain relatively sluggish in the first quar -
ter. January’s sharp drop in private car registra -
tions, according to data from the German As -
sociation of the Automotive Industry, is one of 
a number of factors supporting this view. Sur -
veys by the ifo Institute show that business 
conditions in the consumer-  related retail and 
accommodation and food services sectors like -
wise deteriorated.Private 
consumption  
probably  still 
sluggish
List of references
Bernanke, B. and O. Blanchard (2023), What Caused the US Pandemic- Era Inflation?, PIIE Working 
Papers, 23-4.
Bobeica, E., M. Ciccarelli and I. Vansteenkiste (2019), The Link Between Labor Cost and Price Infla -
tion in the Euro Area, ECB, Working Paper Series, No 2235.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a), Potential for correction of residential property price exaggerations 
in Germany, Monthly Report, August 2023, pp. 58 f.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b), Falling inflation, but not yet time to sound the all- clear – outlook 
for the German economy up to 2026, Monthly Report, December 2023, pp. 15-35.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022), High inflation rates in the euro area and the United States: similar -
ities and differences, Monthly Report, August 2022, pp. 14 f.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020a), Two models for estimating residential property prices in Germany, 
Monthly Report, October 2020, pp. 73 f.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b), The protracted rise in residential property prices in Germany from 
a macroeconomic perspective: transmission channels and fundamental determinants, Monthly 
Report , October 2020, pp. 67-85.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019a), Commentaries, Monthly Report, September 2019, pp. 5-13.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b), Commentaries, Monthly Report, October 2019, pp. 5-12.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019c), The impact of wages on prices in Germany: evidence from selected 
empirical analyses, Monthly Report, September 2019, pp. 15-37.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
55

Deutscher Wetterdienst (2024), Klimatologischer Rückblick auf 2023: Das bisher wärmste Jahr in 
Deutschland , https://www.dwd.de/DE/leistungen/besondereereignisse/temperatur/20240201_
klimarueckblick-2023.html;jsessionid=E2BDD5C3440E78E9A9D81B9EEBC198D8.live11042
European Central Bank (2023), Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area, 
December 2023.
GfK (2023), Consumer Climate: Light at the end of the tunnel?, press release of 20 December 
2023, available at https://www.gfk.com/press/consumer-climate-light-at-the-end-of-the-tunnel#:  
~:text=The%20economic%20expectations%20are%20also,by%20NIM%20for%20December%  
202023
ifo Institute (2023), Order cancellations in German residential construction reach a new high, press 
release of 6 November 2023.
Menz, J.-O. (2024), Sources of Post- Pandemic Inflation in Germany and the Euro Area: An Applica -
tion of Bernanke and Blanchard (2023), Bundesbank Technical Paper, forthcoming.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
56

Public finances*
General government budget
2023 as a whole
Germany’s government finances improved last 
year. The deficit and debt ratios continued to 
decline. While the deficit ratio remained at 2% 
of gross domestic product (GDP), it was mainly 
the result of temporary relief measures. In add -
ition, weak economic activity put a slight strain 
on budgets. In structural terms, the govern -
ment budget was thus roughly balanced (for 
more details, see pp.  59 ff.). The debt ratio 
amounted to just under 65% at the end of the 
third quarter. Compared with its crisis peak of 
69% in 2021, this constituted a swift and sig -
nificant drop towards the reference value of 
60%. The drop was due to the fact that, mainly 
as a result of price factors, nominal GDP grew 
more strongly than debt (denominator effect). 
The deficit and debt ratios remained moderate 
by EU standards.
The deficit ratio fell by ½  percentage point 
compared with 2022. However, this was not 
attributable to austerity policies, but instead to 
the lapsing of temporary coronavirus response 
measures amounting to almost 1½% of GDP . 
By contrast, support measures relating to the 
energy crisis burdened public coffers slightly 
more than in 2022 (see the chart on p. 60). A 
contributing factor here was that policymakers 
opted for broader transfers with virtually no 
means testing. This is especially true of the en -
ergy price brakes, but also of the exemption 
from taxes and social contributions applicable 
to inflation compensation bonuses. Weaker 
economic activity increased the deficit slightly. 
In addition, tax revenue was significantly 
weaker than would have been expected on the 
basis of macroeconomic developments and le -
gislative changes. The preceding remarkably 
sharp rise in tax revenue in 2021 and 2022 was 
partially offset by the countermovement in 
2023 (see p.  62). On the expenditure side, some items increased significantly; besides 
interest expenditure, these included military 
spending.
Outlook for 2024 and 2025
The deficit is likely to decline further this year, 
but as things stand not below 1½% of GDP . 
The expected decline is due to the discontinu -
ation of energy crisis support measures by the 
Economic Stabilisation Fund for Energy Assis -
tance (ESF- E). Following the ruling of the Fed -
eral Constitutional Court in November 2023, 
central government decided not to extend 
them into 2024.1 It is therefore withdrawing 
this assistance somewhat more quickly than 
previously planned. Outside of temporary influ -
ences of this nature, the fiscal balance is likely 
to deteriorate further. Consequently, a moder -
ate structural deficit is to be expected.
Compared with 2023, the structural deficit is 
likely to rise, mainly as a result of additional ex -
penditure in the Climate Fund and the Armed 
Forces Fund. The smaller consolidation meas -
ures in other areas of central government 
finances are much too small to offset this in 
full. Furthermore, the deficits of state and local 
governments could expand somewhat. The re -
cent higher price increases are likely to con -
tinue to push up spending, with the latest 
wage agreements and adjustments to civil ser -
vant pay significantly raising personnel expend -
iture.
The financial situation of the social security 
funds is also expected to deteriorate somewhat Government 
finances 
improved 
in 2023
Deficit ratio fell 
only because 
coronavirus 
response meas -
ures lapsedDeficit will also 
decline in 2024, 
but deterioration 
is likely in 
structural  terms
Larger deficits, 
especially in 
Climate  Fund 
and Armed 
Forces Fund
* The section entitled “General government budget” re -
lates to data from the national accounts and Maastricht 
debt. This is followed by reporting on budgetary develop -
ments (government finance statistics) in the areas for which 
data are available for 2023 as a whole.
1 For more information on the ruling, see Deutsche 
Bundesbank (2023a); on central government’s plans for 
2024, see pp. 68 f.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
57

in 2024. Expenditure on pensions, healthcare 
and long- term care will grow more strongly in 
structural terms than the reference variables for 
contributions. In addition, central government 
will cut several grants, such as to the statutory 
health and pension insurance schemes. Add -
itional revenue from higher contribution rates 
for long-  term care insurance and health insur -
ance will only partially offset the burdens. The 
overall contribution rate to the social security 
funds is likely to rise to almost 41% this year 
(2023: 40.5%).
From the current perspective, the general gov -
ernment deficit ratio looks set to fall again next year. Central government will then have largely 
used up its extensive budgetary reserves in the 
Climate Fund and core budget and will have to 
reduce deficits in those areas.2 In addition, the 
last temporary support measures will expire in 
2025 (in particular the exemption from taxes 
and social contributions applicable to inflation 
compensation bonuses). Compared with this 
relief, factors placing a burden on the budget, 
such as an increasing deficit in the Armed 
Forces Fund, are likely to be of less significance.
The debt ratio is expected to decline further in 
2024 and 2025. While nominal GDP growth is 
not expected to be as strong as in 2023 due to 
slowing price dynamics, it is anticipated that 
the deficit will be lower. However, the decline 
in the debt ratio will be smaller if central gov -
ernment takes out loans to build up a gener -
ational capital fund to ease the burden on the 
statutory pension insurance scheme.
Reform of EU fiscal rules
The planned reform of the EU fiscal rules could 
bring about significant changes in the Euro -
pean rules applicable to Germany as of next 
year (for information on the reform, see p. 65).3 
As things currently stand, it looks like Germany 
will have to limit its structural deficit ratio to a 
maximum of 1½% under the reformed rules.4 
Slight deterior -
ation in social 
security funds 
finances despite 
rising contribu -
tion ratesDeficit is also 
likely to fall in 
2025
Debt ratio on 
downward path
Reform of EU 
fiscal rules: 
requirements 
will change for 
Germany, tooGeneral government fiscal ratios *
* German general government budget as defined in the na-
tional accounts. 1 Taxes and social contributions plus customs 
duties and bank levies to the Single Resolution Fund.
Deutsche Bundesbank45464748495051
21012345
––+++++As a percentage of GDP
Expenditure
Revenue
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023Deficit40414243Taxes and social contributions 1
2 The debt brake limits net borrowing. In 2024, central 
government is financing parts of the deficit using reserves. 
By doing so, it can run a correspondingly larger deficit and 
nevertheless comply with the ceiling on net borrowing it 
has calculated. If the reserves are used up in 2025, the def -
icit will have to fall accordingly in order to continue to 
comply with the ceiling.
3 In 2024, Germany is likely to comply with the EU rules, 
partly because support measures relating to the energy cri -
sis are now expiring earlier than initially planned (this had 
been requested by the European Commission; see Euro -
pean Commission (2023)). The Independent Advisory 
Board of the Stability Council also assumes that Germany 
will comply with the EU requirements (see Independent 
Advisory Board of the Stability Council (2024)).
4 The structural deficit for the purposes of the EU rules is 
calculated using a method different to the Bundesbank’s 
estimation approach. For example, the European Commis -
sion has reported a significantly larger structural deficit for 
Germany in recent years. This is mainly due to the fact that 
it hardly excludes any temporary crisis measures.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
58

German government budget in times of crisis – 
 developments in the period 2020 to 20231
The COVID- 19 pandemic and the energy 
crisis had a massive impact on the German 
general government budget. In 2019 – prior 
to the outbreak of the pandemic – a surplus 
of 1½% of gross domestic product (GDP) 
was recorded. In the fi  rst year of the pan-
demic, which saw substantial restrictions on 
economic activity in some cases, the defi  cit 
ratio was just over 4%.2 Since then, it has 
been gradually declining. Based on initial 
fi  gures (from mid- January 2024), it stood at 
2% in 2023.
This box takes a closer look at the develop-
ments in the government budget since 
2019. For this purpose, general government 
revenue and expenditure in the national ac-
counts are broken down into temporary 
and structural shares. Here, factors with a 
temporary infl  uence include cyclical effects, 
crisis measures, and other one- off effects. 
The indirect effects of the pandemic, which 
are more diffi   cult to capture, have not been 
factored out of the structural balances. For 
instance, expenditure on non- coronavirus- 
related medical treatment decreased and 
revenue from fees was lost due to the use 
of government facilities being restricted at 
times. As the Bundesbank uses its own ana-
lytical methods and estimates, the data on 
structural balances differ from those of 
other institutions.3 Revisions to the national 
accounts data and a changed macroeco-
nomic outlook will have an effect on the 
results presented below.
Cyclical defi  cits caused by economic 
downturn
In 2019, the infl  uence of cyclical factors on 
the government budget was still clearly 
positive. However, it subsequently turned strongly negative in 2020 (see the table on 
p. 63, item 2). The economic downturn re-
sulted primarily in a decline in tax receipts 
and increased expenditure on short- time 
work. It had a much more moderate impact 
on social security contributions and spend-
ing on unemployment benefi  ts. The econ-
omy rebounded in 2021 and 2022. In 2023, 
however, the cyclical impact on the defi  cit 
was once again slightly negative.
Temporary measures were a consider-
able drag
Temporary crisis- related measures weighed 
more heavily on the government budget 
than cyclical factors (see the chart on p. 60). 
In the period from 2020 to 2022, these 
measures accounted for an annual volume 
of around 3% of GDP . In 2022, new relief 
measures in response to the energy crisis 
virtually cancelled out the reduced corona-
virus measures. Last year, the remaining 
coronavirus- related spending for 2022 
largely came to an end. The total volume of 
support measures fell to 1¾% in 2023.
The corporate sector received the largest 
share of the temporary support measures. 
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2006) for notes on the 
analytical approach used here. The analysis relates to 
data from the national accounts.
2 The last time the general government budget re-
corded a greater deterioration was in 1995: this was 
due to the assumption of debt totalling €122 billion 
(6½% of GDP), which affected the defi  cit at the time – 
largely from the Treuhand agency, which was respon-
sible for the privatisation and winding- up of state- 
owned enterprises and formed part of the corporate 
sector.
3 For example, the Federal Government and the Euro-
pean Commission generally do not factor out the sup-
port measures temporarily put in place during these 
years from the structural government budget, which is 
why the levels and changes they report differ consider-
ably from the data presented here.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
59

These included direct transfers (primarily 
coronavirus bridging aid from 2020 to 
2022), payments to offset losses (primarily 
for gas trading companies in 2022), the ma-
jority of the energy price brakes (2023), and 
the assumption of social contributions for 
short- time work from 2020 to 2022.4 In 
addition, special tax arrangements boosted 
corporate liquidity. In essence, these ar-
rangements merely had the effect of shift-
ing tax revenue along the time axis. Ex-
amples include the deferral of special ad-
vance VAT payments and an increased 
scope for loss carrybacks.5 Households pri-
marily received one- off energy price allow-
ances (2022), transfers from the energy 
price brakes (2023), and bonus child benefi  t 
payments (2020 to 2022). VAT rates were 
temporarily lowered for enterprises and 
households (generally in the second half of 
2020, on restaurant meals from July 2020 
until the end of 2023, for gas and heating 
from autumn 2022, currently set to expire at the end of March 2024), as were energy 
tax rates (summer 2022). In addition, in 
2021, the government employed subsidies 
to stabilise the renewable energy (EEG) levy. 
Moreover, since the end of 2022 up to and 
including 2024, infl  ation compensation 
paid out to workers has been exempt from 
taxes and social contributions. An overview 
of the most signifi  cant measures can be 
found on p. 61.
Real government consumption also saw a 
signifi  cant temporary increase. For example, 
the COVID- 19 pandemic resulted in a sig-
nifi  cant amount of healthcare- related gov-
ernment spending. Initially, this was on per-
sonal protective equipment, additional in-
tensive care capacities and PCR tests, subse-
quently also on vaccinations, and fi  nally on 
tests for the general public. Moreover, cen-
tral government paid temporary compensa-
tion to hospitals so that they could keep 
empty beds available.
Finally, in addition to refunds for pandemic- 
related payments, central government paid 
extensive special grants to the social secur-
ity funds. Without these, the funds would 
have needed to raise their contribution 
rates to a much higher level in order to 
close funding gaps.
Temporary non- crisis- related infl  uences
Temporary one- off non- crisis- related infl  u-
ences also had an impact; these are fac-
tored out of the structural balance. Specifi  c-
ally, this relates to two effects that increased 
the defi  cit in 2021 (each of which ac-
counted for around 0.1% of GDP). First, the 
4 Expenditure on short- time working benefi  ts is largely 
regarded as a cyclical infl  uence.
5 Added to this were other government support meas-
ures such as loan guarantees, loans and equity partici-
pations in response to the coronavirus pandemic. 
These were not refl  ected as fi  nancial transactions in 
the national accounts defi  cit, but in the debt level only.Temporary fiscal measures affecting 
the deficit that are directly linked to the 
COVID-19 pandemic and the energy crisis*
* Bundesbank estimate. This definition does not include longer-
term fiscal projects. 1 VAT rate and energy tax rate cuts, reven-
ue  shortfalls  due  to  employers'  one-off  payments  being  ex-
empt from income tax and social contributions, stabilisation of 
the renewable energy (EEG) levy and reduction in fares for local 
public transport (€9 ticket).
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021 2022 202300.51.01.52.02.53.03.5As a percentage of GDP
00.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Energy crisis
COVID-19
pandemic
No allocation1
Direct support
for households
Direct support
for enterprises
Direct government
demandBroken down by transmission channelDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
60

government paid one- off compensation to 
energy companies in the context of Ger-
many’s moving away from nuclear power. 
Second, it refunded interest paid on tax 
debts because the Federal Constitutional 
Court ruled that the interest rate was too 
high.6
Moderate deterioration in the structural 
balance during the crises
The structural balance is obtained by de-
ducting the cyclical effects, temporary 
measures and infl  uences described above 
from the unadjusted balance.
Over the course of the crises, the structural 
situation of the government budget under-
went a moderate deterioration (see the 
table on p. 63, item 4): having recorded a 
surplus of ½% of GDP in structural terms in 
2019, it was roughly balanced in 2023. The 
expenditure ratio increased at a slightly 
steeper rate than the revenue ratio (the 
structural ratios are presented here and 
below).
The structural general government budget 
ratio fl  uctuated strongly over time. This is 
due in large part to the tax ratio. The 
models are not well suited to explaining its 
upward and downward movements (see 
item 8.4). In the case of non- tax revenue 
(primarily sales) and individual categories of 
expenditure (primarily subsidies), interim 
changes in ratios are due in part to the fact 
that it is not always possible to identify tem-
porary infl  uences conclusively. However, 
this is virtually irrelevant when it comes to 
comparing the development of the struc-
tural general government budget in 2023 
with 2019. The erratic upward and down-
ward fl  uctuations largely balance each 
other out over this period.In terms of revenue, the social security con-
tributions ratio increased because contribu-
tion rates were raised: the average supple-
mentary contribution rates for health insur-
ance institutions rose each year from 2020, 
while the contribution rates for unemploy-
ment and long- term care insurance went 
up in 2023. As a result, the overall social 
contribution rate was 40.5% last year, com-
pared with 39.7% in 2019.
The tax ratio fl  uctuated signifi  cantly and 
was down slightly on 2019. Although 
bracket creep had a positive impact – espe-
cially in the past two years, due to high in-
fl  ation (see item 8.1) – tax cuts were more  
than twice as substantial overall (see item 
8.3). With regard to income tax (including 
the solidarity surcharge), legislators have 
6 The national accounts record payments based on 
court rulings as government capital transfers as soon 
as the ruling enters into legal force and it becomes 
possible to gauge the level of reimbursement.Funding volume of key temporary 
support measures affecting the deficit 
during the COVID-19 pandemic and the 
energy crisis*
* Bundesbank estimate of reduced/increased government rev-
enue from 2020 to 2023. 1 Including payments for December 
2022  energy  bill  installments.  2 Compensation  payments  for 
keeping  beds  unoccupied.  3 Excluding  expenditure  on  short-
time work, as this is mostly counted as cyclical spending. 4 Ad-
ditional expenditure on health protection measures,  tax meas-
ures, social transfers and grants.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5As a percentage of GDP in 2023
Other4Stabilisation of renewable 
energy (EEG) levyAssumption of social security 
contributions on short-time 
working benefits3Reduced revenue due to 
inflation compensation bonusesCapital measures for 
energy companiesEnergy price allowancesHospital compensation2Energy price brakes1VAT/energy tax cutsCOVID-19 tests and vaccinationsDirect assistance to enterprises 
during the COVID-19 pandemicDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
61

lowered the overall scale more than the tax 
burden has increased due to bracket creep 
(see the chart above). This is essentially due 
to the fact that the solidarity surcharge was 
completely or partially abolished for lower 
and medium income households in 2021. In 
2022 and 2023, the price- adjusted tax 
scales were again noticeably higher for a 
time than in 2021. This is because legisla-
tors only brought the tax scale into line with 
infl  ation for the respective year in the sub-
sequent year. This means that when infl  a-
tion rates rise, the price- adjusted tax bur-
den also goes up. This year, the scale will 
drop back down towards the level recorded in 2021. One exception to this is the section 
of the scale above the threshold for the 
top- income tax bracket. Legislators have 
not brought this into line with infl  ation re-
cently.7
7 In addition to the above- mentioned time lag, an-
other factor is that the scales are adjusted on the basis 
of infl  ation rate estimates. For more details on how 
legislators generally bring the income tax rate into line 
with infl  ation, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a). The 
top- income tax rate refers to the increase in the tax 
rate from 42% to 45% for the portion of taxable in-
come that exceeds €277,825 for individually assessed 
taxpayers.Price-adjusted income tax scales and deviation from the 2019 tax scale*
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. * Based on the income tax scale for individually assessed taxpayers. 
The tax scales are shown inclusive of the respective solidarity surcharge. They are adjusted using the deflator for private consumption 
from the national accounts (for 2024: Bundesbank projection). To this end, incomes are deflated using the inflation rate from the re-
spective year in which the tax scale applied through to 2024. The respective applicable tax rates are then applied. If tax scales always 
shifted exactly in line with the inflation rate, the scales would overlap exactly. 1 Price-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank5 15 25 35 45 55 65 75 85 95051015202530354045
0.5
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0+
–
–
–
–051015202530354045
+0.5
0
–0.5
–1.0
–1.5
–2.0
120 190 260 330 400
Income in € thousandAverage income tax burden %
Deviation from the price-adjusted 2019 tax scale in percentage points202420231202212021120191Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
62

The major fl  uctuations in the tax ratio are 
largely the result of taxes on profi  ts. In 2021 
and 2022, after adjusting for legislative 
changes, they signifi  cantly outstripped 
trend growth in their macroeconomic refer-
ence variables (see item 8.4). However, a 
signifi  cant countermovement took hold in 
2023, which partially offset excess growth. 
In 2023, other major types of tax such as 
wage tax and VAT also recorded weak 
growth. In fact, real estate acquisition tax 
revenue fell sharply (see p. 66 for more de-
tails).
In 2023, the ratio of other revenue was 
broadly in line with 2019. Although interest income has risen signifi  cantly recently, the 
fact that the Bundesbank has not trans-
ferred any profi  ts to central government 
since 2021 has reduced revenue.
The expenditure ratio increased noticeably 
in comparison to 2019. It initially rose 
sharply in the period leading up to 2021, 
when it reached its highest level since Ger-
many’s reunifi  cation, before falling again 
somewhat in 2022 and 2023. The main rea-
son for this decline was that major expend-
iture categories are lagging behind infl  a-
tion. Consequently, nominal trend GDP in 
the denominator of the ratio (see items 20 
and 21) is growing faster than expenditure Structural development of the government budget*
Year-on-year change in the ratio to trend GDP in percentage points
Item 2020 2021 2022 20232023 in 
relation to 
2019
 1 Unadjusted fi  scal balance 1 – 5.9 0.8 1.1 0.5 – 3.5
 2 Cyclical component 1 – 1.9 0.5 0.4 – 0.2 – 1.2
 3 Special temporary effects 1 – 2.7 – 0.8 0.4 1.2 – 1.8
 4 Fiscal balance – 1.2 1.0 0.2 – 0.5 – 0.5
 5 Interest payable 2 – 0.2 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.1
 5.1 due to change in average interest rate – 0.2 – 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.1
 5.2 due to change in debt level 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
 6 Primary balance – 1.4 0.9 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.5
 7 Revenue – 0.4 1.2 0.3 – 0.9 0.2
 8 Taxes and social contributions – 0.1 0.9 0.1 – 1.1 – 0.2
 8.1  Fiscal drag 3 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.7
 8.2   Decoupling of macroeconomic reference variables 
from GDP 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1
 8.3  Legislative changes – 0.2 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 1.6
 8.4  Residual 0.0 1.3 0.4 – 0.8 0.9
 9 Social contributions – 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.3
10 Other revenue 4 – 0.2 0.1 – 0.1 0.2 0.0
11 Primary expenditure 1.0 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.6 0.6
12 Social payments 0.1 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.5 – 0.2
13 Subsidies 0.3 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 0.0
14 Compensation of employees 0.1 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3
15 Intermediate consumption 0.1 – 0.2 0.0 0.4 0.3
16 Gross fi  xed capital formation 0.2 – 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.2
17 Capital transfers 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.1 0.7
18 Other expenditure 5 0.2 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.2 0.0
Memo item:
20 Real trend GDP 6 0.9 0.8 0.8 0.8 3.4
21 GDP defl  ator 6 1.9 3.0 5.3 6.6 17.8
* The structural fi  gures are derived by adjusting for cyclical infl  uences and special temporary effects (primarily crisis measures). 
For analytical purposes, 2023 was adjusted for a statistical reclassifi  cation: in 2023, local public transport was reassigned from 
the corporate sector to the general government sector. Due to this reclassifi  cation, general government revenue and expend-
iture in 2023 each rose by ¼% of GDP . This increase will appear only temporarily in the national accounts, as with the general 
revision in August, local public transport will be assigned to the general government sector for previous years, too. 1 Change 
in the ratio to GDP compared with previous year. 2 2023 breakdown estimated, as end-year debt level is not yet available. 
3 The term “fi  scal drag” encompasses the positive revenue effect of bracket creep in income taxation and the negative impact 
of the fact that specifi  c excise duties are largely independent of prices. 4 Other current transfers receivable, sales and total 
capital revenue (excluding capital taxes). 5 Other current transfers payable, other net acquisitions of non- fi  nancial assets. 
6 Year-on-year percentage change.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
63

In addition, the debt ratio will need to fall by 
an average of ½  percentage point annually 
until it reaches the reference value of 60%. 
Seen from the present perspective, Germany 
will comply with these requirements. However, 
additional requirements could be imposed to 
make provisions for the increasing burdens re -
lated to population ageing. Overall, it is not yet 
entirely clear what exactly the reformed EU 
rules will mean for Germany.
Debt brake strengthened
Following the ruling of the Federal Constitu -
tional Court in November 2023, the binding ef -
fect of the German debt brake on fiscal policy is 
stronger once again. At present, there are vari -
ous proposals to loosen the debt brake through 
amendments to Germany’s constitution, or 
Basic Law. Some proposals aim to broaden the 
leeway for borrowing in general. Others want 
exclusively investment expenditure or trans -formation tasks, for example, to be financed 
through additional debt. Two main approaches 
are being discussed: one in which the debt 
brake would be replaced by a golden rule again, 
and another in which an additional debt-  
financed special fund would be introduced in 
the Basic Law alongside the debt brake.
The Bundesbank considers effective fiscal rules 
important to safeguard sound government 
finances. Prior to the ruling of the Federal Con -
stitutional Court, the debt brake had been soft -
ened by means of the escape clause. This is 
also why the Bundesbank was already con -
sidering in the spring of 2022 how the debt 
brake could be reformed in a way that would 
safeguard stability.5 The thinking was to have a 
rule with a stronger binding effect again and 
tie it to greater leeway for deficits.6 This also Change in debt 
brake under 
discussion With binding 
fiscal  rules, 
somewhat 
broader leeway 
for borrowing is 
justifiablein the numerator due to high infl  ation.8 
Given that more and more expenditure is 
likely to catch up, the expenditure ratio is 
expected to rise again this year.
The rise in the expenditure ratio was mainly 
due to the signifi  cant increase in govern-
ment spending on climate action. This was 
refl  ected in particular in higher capital trans-
fers. These include grants from the Climate 
Fund for energy- effi   cient building refurbish-
ment and e- mobility, for instance. The inter-
mediate consumption ratio also grew 
strongly – especially in 2023.
Although the interest expenditure ratio is 
still low in a longer- term comparison, it 
started rising again for the fi  rst time in 
many years in 2022. This was due to infl  a-
tion. Expenditure on infl  ation-linked secur-
ities increased considerably in 2022 and 
2023 (see also p.  71). By contrast, the higher debt ratio was virtually irrelevant for 
interest expenditure over the period as a 
whole. First, the debt ratio at the end of 
2023 was no longer much higher than in 
2019. Second, the rate of interest on new 
debt remained very low on average.
Social benefi  ts and employee compensation 
ratios have declined considerably in recent 
years. These expenses largely adjust to sig-
nifi  cantly increased price levels only with a 
time lag.9 For instance, this applies to wages 
and salaries within the public sector, and to 
pension adjustments.
8 Trend nominal GDP in the denominator of the ratio 
is calculated as the product of the unadjusted GDP de-
fl  ator and the trend in real GDP .
9 For the effects of infl  ation on general government 
budgets in euro area countries, see Bańkowski et al. 
(2023).
5 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022b).
6 This is very much in line with the latest proposals by the 
German Council of Economic Experts (2024).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
64

The reform of the EU’s fi  scal rules
In December 2023, the Economic and 
Financial Affairs Council (ECOFIN) agreed 
on new regulations concerning the EU’s fi  s-
cal rules. Although the new rules still have 
to be negotiated with the European Parlia-
ment and fi  nalised, the basic principles 
underlying them have now been defi  ned.
The ECOFIN agreement contains important 
fi  scal anchors. For example, the fact that 
the 3% limit for the defi  cit ratio will be 
maintained and remain backed by sanctions 
is welcome. For Member States with defi  cit 
or debt ratios above the respective refer-
ence value, moreover, the new rules envis-
age a more ambitious budgetary objective 
than the 3% limit. These countries will be 
obliged to achieve a structural defi  cit ratio 
of no more than 1.5% over the medium 
term. Another welcome development is 
that foreseeable ageing- related costs are to 
be taken into account.
However, a number of aspects of the re-
form are problematic. These include the 
wide discretionary scope in many instances, 
and the fact that the annual budgetary 
limits rely on assumptions. The European 
Commission is to negotiate these assump-
tions bilaterally with each Member State. At 
the same time, the rules are very compli-
cated. Even with great effort, third parties 
will struggle to follow how the fi  nal limits 
were agreed upon and whether they have 
been adhered to. This will make public dis-
cussion of how the rules are implemented 
more diffi   cult, risking the loss of an import-
ant pillar of oversight. This, too, could en-
courage the setting of unambitious annual 
limits, which would delay any necessary 
consolidation.Moreover, transitional provisions may de-
cisively reduce the pace of consolidation in 
the coming years. For a transitional period 
following the launch of the new rules, some 
elements of the basic rules will be watered 
down. The present high debt ratios could 
thus become further entrenched or even 
rise.
All in all, there is a risk that the new rules 
will barely contribute at all to the objective 
of sound public fi  nances. Experience has 
shown that governments have little interest 
in being fi  scally constrained by budgetary 
rules. The broad discretionary scope permit-
ted in the rules’ implementation plays into 
this tendency. This makes it all the more im-
portant for the European Commission and 
ECOFIN to translate the rules into ambitious 
requirements and press for Member State 
compliance. Only then are we likely to see a 
rapid fall in high debt ratios, in particular. 
Strict application of the rules would also 
boost capital markets’ confi  dence in the 
soundness of public fi  nances.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
65

fits in with the current debate: German fiscal 
rules should prescribe budget ceilings to ensure 
that Germany generally complies with the 60% 
reference value for the debt ratio and that it 
returns to compliance swiftly if it overshoots 
this threshold. In this context, it would be pos -
sible to earmark some borrowing for certain 
government expenditure items. This could be 
done, for example, using a capped golden rule, 
as discussed by the Bundesbank, under which 
net government investment could be financed 
by borrowing up to a fixed ceiling.7 A special 
fund with its own credit limit in Germany’s 
Basic Law could be designed in such a way that 
it expands the leeway for a deficit in a compar -
able way; in this respect it would not contradict 
these basic considerations. It should be borne 
in mind that Germany must, at the same time, 
comply with the EU budget rules. In other 
words, the tighter of the two sets of rules will 
determine the leeway for deficits.Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
 government
Tax revenue
2023 as a whole
Tax revenue8 grew by 2% year on year in 2023, 
or €15 billion (see the adjacent chart and the 
table on p. 67). On the one hand, high inflation 
led to a significant increase in the macroeco -
nomic reference variables for taxes. Additional 
revenue was also generated through progres -
sive taxation. On the other hand, tax cuts 
markedly dampened the increase, which, over -
all, was €3 billion, or 0.3  percentage point 
lower than expected in the October tax esti -
mate.9
Wage tax revenue increased by 4%, or €9 bil -
lion. This increase was 3  percentage points 
lower than the growth in the relevant macro -
economic reference variable of gross wages 
and salaries. That is because, on balance, tax 
cuts outweighed the boosting effects of pro -
gressive taxation. Compared with 2022, the 
disappearance of energy price allowances (€10 
billion) increased tax revenue. The allowances 
had been paid out of wage tax revenue for the 
most part. More significant, however, were 
permanent tax cuts. Above all, legislators ad -
justed the income tax scale to compensate for 
the high bracket creep of 2022. In addition, 
one- off wage payments were in many cases 
made in the form of tax- free inflation compen -
sation bonuses. Last but not least, the signifi -
cant increase in child benefits, which are paid 
out of wage tax revenue, had a dampening ef -
fect.Tax revenue 
increased mod -
erately in 2023 
– slightly under -
shooting official 
tax estimate
Tax cuts damp -
ened wage tax 
revenue and …Tax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Comprises joint taxes as 
well as central government taxes and state government taxes. 
Including EU shares in German tax revenue, including customs 
duties, but excluding receipts from local government taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2021 2022 2023505101520
–++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly figures
7 The cap is fundamental to a stability- oriented design; 
without it, there are strong incentives to broadly define 
where investment should go and thus undermine the rule.
8 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding 
receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the year.
9 For more details on the official tax estimate, see Deutsche 
Bundesbank (2023b), pp. 63 ff.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
66

In 2023, VAT receipts rose by only 2½%, which 
was 3 percentage points less than nominal pri -
vate consumption – its most important macro -
economic reference variable. Tax cuts signifi -
cantly reduced growth here. These were mainly 
the temporarily lower tax rates on natural gas 
and district heating. In addition, it appears that 
tax revenue in 2022 might have been inflated 
owing to back- payments of taxes from the 
coronavirus crisis.
On the whole, profit- related taxes moved side -
ways. Assessed income tax and corporation tax 
both recorded declines. In addition to weak 
real economic developments, legislative 
changes were also a factor in this. These legis -
lative changes mainly concerned income tax, 
with the aforementioned compensation for 
bracket creep. By contrast, non- assessed taxes 
on earnings (in particular dividend taxation) 
and withholding tax on interest income and 
capital gains recorded dynamic growth.The downturn in the real estate sector put a 
dampener on real estate acquisition tax, which 
flows into state budgets. Revenue was down 
by 29%, or €5 billion, compared with 2022.10 
This reduced overall revenue growth by ½ per -
centage point.
Outlook for 2024
For the current year, the official tax estimate of 
last October expected tax revenue to rise more 
sharply than in 2023, with the macroeconomic 
reference variables developing somewhat less 
favourably. On balance, though, the shortfalls 
due to legislative changes are significantly 
lower than in 2023:
– At the beginning of 2024, legislators ad -
justed the income tax scale to a similar ex -
tent as in the previous year.… VAT revenue
Decline in 
income tax and 
corporation tax, 
dynamic growth 
in investment 
income taxRevenue from 
real estate 
acquisition tax 
down sharply
Tax estimate: 
significant 
revenue  growth 
in 2024Tax revenue
 
Type of taxFull yearEstimate 
for 2023 1Q4
2022 2023 2022 2023
€ billionYear-on-year 
changeYear-
on-year 
change
in % € billionYear-on-year 
change
€ billion % € billion %
Tax revenue, total 2 814.9 829.8 + 14.9 +  1.8 +  2.2 221.5 221.3 –  0.2 –   0.1
of which:
Wage tax 3 227.2 236.2 +  9.0 +  4.0 +  4.7 67.2 64.7 –  2.6 –   3.8
Profi  t-related taxes 162.9 163.0 +  0.1 +  0.1 +  0.1 42.4 42.4 –  0.0 –   0.1
Assessed income tax 4 77.4 73.4 –  4.0 –  5.2 –  5.8 21.7 21.2 –  0.5 –   2.4
Corporation tax 5 46.3 44.9 –  1.5 –  3.2 –  0.4 13.2 11.8 –  1.3 –  10.2
Non- assessed taxes on 
earnings 32.6 36.4 +  3.8 + 11.8 + 12.7 6.4 6.7 +  0.2 +   3.8
Withholding tax on inter-
est income  and capital  
gains 6.6 8.4 +  1.8 + 27.5 + 11.3 1.1 2.7 +  1.6 + 142.8
VAT6 284.9 291.4 +  6.5 +  2.3 +  2.9 72.3 74.5 +  2.2 +   3.0
Other consumption-related 
taxes 7 88.4 93.3 +  4.9 +  5.5 +  5.4 26.1 27.1 +  1.0 +   3.8
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Working Party on Tax Revenue  Estimates and Bundesbank calculations. 1  According to offi   cial tax 
estimate of October 2023. 2 Comprises joint taxes as well as central government taxes and state government taxes. Including EU shares 
in German tax revenue, including customs duties, but excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Child benefi  ts and subsidies for 
supplementary private pension plans deducted from revenue. 4  Employee refunds and research grants deducted from revenue. 5  Research 
grants deducted from revenue. 6 VAT and import VAT. 7 Taxes on energy, tobacco, insurance, motor vehicles, electricity, alcohol, air traf-
fi  c, coffee, sparkling wine, intermediate products, alcopops, betting and lotteries, beer and fi  re protection.
Deutsche Bundesbank
10 See also Table X.7 in the Statistical Section of this 
Monthly Report.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
67

– In the area of indirect taxes, there is a net 
increase in revenue. Although electricity tax 
for the manufacturing sector fell to the 
European minimum rate, the reduction in 
VAT on food in restaurants came to an end 
at the beginning of 2024. Furthermore, VAT 
on natural gas and district heating is ex -
pected to rise again at the end of March.
– In addition, profit- related taxes are now 
generating additional revenue as a result of 
write- offs being made at an accelerated 
pace in recent years.
– The share of gross wages and salaries paid 
as tax and social contribution- exempt infla -
tion compensation bonuses is likely to de -
cline.
However, tax revenue is likely to be significantly 
lower than forecast in the latest official tax esti -
mate. This is due, first of all, to lower revenue 
as a result of legislative changes implemented in the intervening period. The aforementioned 
reduction in electricity tax is particularly signifi -
cant in this regard. There are also plans to fur -
ther increase the income tax allowances. In 
addition, limited shortfalls may yet arise as a 
result of the Growth Opportunities Act (Wachs -
tumschancengesetz),  which is currently still the 
subject of a mediation procedure between the 
Bundestag and the Bundesrat. Second, the 
lower- than- expected tax revenue in 2023 is 
likely to partly spill over into 2024. Third, eco -
nomic growth could be lower than assumed in 
autumn.
Central government finances
Overview for 2023: central government 
 including off- budget entities
Central government’s initial response to the rul -
ing of the Federal Constitutional Court of No -
vember 2023 was to adopt a supplementary 
budget for 2023. This reduced the planned 
central government deficit (including off-  
budget entities) from an original €232 billion to 
€135 billion (see the table on p. 69, item 21). 
The deficit11 was ultimately much lower still, at 
€88 billion (ibid.). The off- budget entities, in 
particular, closed the year more favourably 
than in the adjusted plans, especially the Cli -
mate Fund. In addition, special funds with no 
figures in the central government budget bor -
rowing plan recorded considerable surpluses. 
Compared with 2022, the total central govern -
Revenue expect -
ations for 2024 
noticeably lower 
than official tax 
estimate2023: central 
government’s 
overall deficit 
down substan -
tially and lower 
than most 
recently 
envisaged Fiscal balance of central government 
budget *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Feder-
al Ministry of Finance. * Excluding off-budget entities. Not ad-
justed for financial transactions or cyclical effects. 1 The trans-
fer of €16 billion from the core budget to the Flood Relief Fund 
was corrected by the removal of €14 billion in reserves follow-
ing the Federal Constitutional Court's ruling in late 2023. 2 Ex-
cluding the transfer of € 60 billion from the core budget to the 
Climate Fund, which the Federal Constitutional Court deemed 
unconstitutional in its ruling of 15 November 2023.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4–150–100–500100500
––
2023
20212021Quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year
2022€ billion
20222023
22
11
11 Besides the core budget, central government off- budget 
entities that use the single- entry system and for which data 
are already available are included here (see pp. 72 f.). These 
comprise, in particular, (i) the ESF-E, (ii) the off- budget en -
tities relevant to the debt brake up to 2021, and (iii) the 
Armed Forces Fund (see the table on p. 69, items 16, 17 
and 20). In addition, the reporting group for off- budget 
entities includes, above all, (iv) the other funds with figures 
in the central government budget borrowing plan (special 
funds for making provisions for redemptions and for ex -
tending childcare, item 18, ibid.), as well as (v) entities with 
no published borrowing plan figures (thus not counting to -
wards the planned deficit), such as the precautionary fund 
for civil servants’ pensions (item 19, ibid.). In particular, the 
bad bank FMSW, the fund for the disposal of nuclear en -
ergy waste, the motorway company and the development 
aid company GIZ are completely excluded.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
68

Key central government budget data*
€ billion
ItemActual 
2022Target 
2023Supple-
mentary 
budget 
target 
2023Actual 
2023 
(as at 
January 
2024)Draft 
2024 
(as at 
August 
2023)Target 
2024
1.Expenditure of central government budget (CGB) 1 480.7 476.3 461.2 457.1 445.7 476.8
of which:
1.a Investment 46.2 71.5 61.1 55.0 54.2 70.5
1.b Global spending increases/ cuts ––   6.9 –  11.9 – –  9.7 –  10.5
2.Revenue of CGB 1,2 364.7 389.9 389.7 392.2 427.7 427.5
of which:
2.a Tax revenue 3 337.2 358.1 356.3 356.1 375.3 377.6
2.b Global revenue increases/ shortfalls ––   4.9 –   4.9 – 1.4 –   2.0
3.Fiscal balance of CGB (2.-1.) – 116.0 –  86.4 –  71.5 – 64.9 – 18.0 –  49.4
4.Coin seigniorage of CGB 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.2
5.Transfer to (–) / withdrawal from reserves (+) in CGB 0.5 40.5 43.8 37.5 1.4 10.2
6.Net borrowing (–) / repayment (+) of CGB (3.+4.+5.) – 115.4 –  45.6 –  27.4 – 27.2 – 16.6 –  39.0
7.Cyclical component in the budget procedure 4 –   1.8 –  15.3 –   5.5 –  7.1 –  2.4 –   7.7
8.Balance of fi  nancial transactions of CGB –   4.1 –  17.7 –   7.7 –  7.7 –  0.6 –  16.9
9.Structural net borrowing (–) / repayment (+) (6.-7.-8.) – 109.5 –  12.6 –  14.2 – 12.4 – 13.5 –  14.4
10. Amount exceeding limit in CGB (13.-9.) 97.0 – 1.6 5 1.4 – –
11. Amount exceeding limit incl. Economic Stabilisation Fund for 
 Energy Assistance (ESF-E) (10.-15.) 276.4 – 44.8 42.9 – –
12. Memo item: Amount exceeding limit with balance of off-budget 
entities  (10.-16a.-17.) 106.7 142.5 60.8 46.4 51.5 34.5
13. Standard upper limit: Structural net borrowing (0.35% of GDP) 6–  12.5 –  12.6 –  12.6 – 12.6 – 13.5 –  14.4
14. Structural balance of CGB (3.-7.-8.) – 110.1 –  53.4 –  58.3 – 50.2 – 15.0 –  24.8
14.a As before, with estimate of potential output acc. to 2023 
autumn  forecast – 111.2 –  57.5 –  52.6 – 46.0 –  9.7 –  24.8
15. Structural net borrowing of ESF-E – 179.4 ––  43.2 – 41.5 – –
16. Defi  cit of ESF-E –  30.2 – 121.2 –  43.2 – 41.5 – 13.9 –
16.a Defi  cit of ESF-E excluding fi  nancial transactions –   9.7 – 106.0 –  43.2 – 41.5 – 13.9 –
16.b ESF funds remaining thereafter 169.8 48.6 – – 34.7 –
17. Balance of special funds (SFs) relevant to the debt brake prior 
to 2022 7 4.9 –  21.4 –  16.0 –  3.5 – 37.6 –  34.5
17.a Climate and Transformation Fund 5.3 –  14.1 –  14.1 –  1.7 – 29.2 –  28.7
17.b 2013 Flood Relief Fund –   0.2 –   0.2 –   0.2 –  0.2 –  0.2 –   0.2
17.c Fund to Promote Municipal Investment –   0.7 –   1.0 –   1.0 –  0.6 –  0.9 –   0.9
17.d Digitalisation Fund 2.1 –   2.7 –   0.8 –  1.1 –  4.2 –   4.1
17.e Fund for Primary School- Age Childcare Provision –   0.1 –   0.4 0.0 0.0 –  0.4 –   0.7
17.f 2021 Flood Relief Fund –   1.6 –   3.0 0.0 0.0 –  2.7 –
18. Balance of SFs for making provisions for repayment and for 
extending  childcare 4.4 5.5 4.1 4.0 3.0 2.2
19. Balance of other SFs without own constitutional rules 8 –   9.9 – – 23.9 – –
20. Balance of Armed Forces Fund ––   8.4 –   8.4 –  5.8 – 19.2 –  19.8
20.a Borrowing authorisation remaining thereafter 100.0 91.6 91.6 94.2 72.4 74.4
21. Balance of CGB and SFs (3.+16.+17.+18.+19.+20.) – 146.8 – 231.7 – 135.0 – 87.8 – 85.7 – 101.4
22. Reserves of SFs for 16. and 17. 286.9 144.4 25.2 38.3 92.9 3.8
23. Central government assets in civil servants’ pension reserves 
and pension fund 9 26.3
24. Level of general CGB reserves 48.2 7.7 4.4 10.7 6.3 0.5
25. Balance on control account 47.7 47.7 47.7 49.2 47.7 49.2
26. Total outstanding repayment amount including Armed Forces 
Fund 10 538.0 546.4 345.2 340.7 565.6 360.5
27. Total outstanding repayment amount from NGEU grants e,11 30 38 38 45 61 65
* Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. Figures in Actual 2022, Target 2023 and Draft 2024 prior to the rul-
ing of the Federal Constitutional Court in November. For methodological notes, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2016). 1 Excluding transfers 
to/withdrawals from reserves and including net tax revenue (for information on deductions made from revenue and expenditure, see 
footnote 3). 2 Excluding coin seigniorage. 3 After deduction of supplementary central government transfers, shares of energy tax rev-
enue, compensation under the 2009 reform of motor vehicle tax and budgetary recovery assistance to federal states. 4 For 2022 accord-
ing to the September 2023 fi  gures, for 2023 according to the budget plan and the January 2024 national accounts, and for 2024 accord-
ing to the 2023 spring and autumn forecasts. 5 In arithmetical terms: -€0.18 billion. However, the actual payment of €1.37 billion to the 
2021 Flood Relief Fund was booked, for which the escape clause was activated. The difference was posted to the control account. 
6 Based on GDP in the year before the (comprehensive) budget is prepared. 7 Budgeted fi  gures for 2023 and 2024 from borrowing plan. 
8 Entities with quarterly data, but with no fi  gures in borrowing plan. Above all, ESF (excluding ESF-E) and pension provisions. 9 Market 
values according to central government balance sheet for 2022. Continuous infl  ows; withdrawals from the fund planned from 2030, from 
reserves from 2032. 10  Extrapolation of the previous year’s fi  gures with items 11 and 20; in Actual 2023, including change in the control 
account. In Supplementary budget target 2023, Actual 2023 and Target 2024: following removal of reserves from emergency borrowing. 
11 NGEU budgeted fi  gures and estimates, each multiplied by Germany’s share of 25½% in EU gross national income.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
69

ment deficit (including off- budget entities) de -
creased very sharply, going down by €59 bil -
lion. The deficit fell mainly in the core budget.
2023: Federal Constitutional Court ruling 
necessitated budget revision
Central government had to revise its budget 
plans for 2023 on account of the Federal Con -
stitutional Court’s ruling. The budget plans had 
originally set aside extensive reserves from 
emergency borrowing for the Climate Fund, 
the ESF- E and the 2021 Flood Relief Fund. Cen -
tral government scrapped the transfer of €60 
billion, which had been deemed unconstitu -
tional, to the reserve of the Climate Fund, and 
fully scrapped the reserves of the other two 
funds. Subsequently, it envisaged borrowing 
under the escape clause in the ESF- E and in the 
core budget for the Flood Relief Fund, replacing 
previously planned withdrawals from reserves. 
A need for adjustment was also identified in 
the core budget, as the calculated cyclical bur -
den was €10 billion lower in the current projec -
tion.12 To offset this, the supplementary budget 
contains, in particular, larger global spending 
cuts, additional withdrawals from reserves, and 
lower interest expenditure.
2023: core budget outturn
The core budget closed the year with a deficit 
of €65 billion – an improvement of €6½ billion 
on the supplementary budget. Revenue ex -
ceeded the planned figure by €2½ billion (see 
the table on p. 69, item 2). Overall, expenditure 
remained €4 billion below budget estimates, 
particularly in the case of investments, other 
operating expenditure and transfers to enter -
prises. The target-  actual deviations for individ -
ual budget items are remarkable: as central 
government only finalised adjustments within 
the supplementary budget shortly before the 
end of the year, more accurate estimates would 
actually have been expected here. Instead, the 
supplementary budget still contained large 
global spending cuts (item 1.b, ibid.).The deficit in the core budget fell sharply year 
on year, by €51 billion. Revenue rose substan -
tially, by 6½% (+€26 billion).13 In addition to 
higher tax revenue, this was due, not least, to 
receipts of €4 billion from the EU debt- financed 
Next Generation EU (NGEU) off- budget entity. 
Total expenditure, by contrast, decreased by a 
significant 5% (-€25 billion), chiefly on account 
of the fact that pandemic- related spending 
–  on the statutory health insurance scheme 
and business aid, for example  – came to an 
end. This outweighed the marked increase in 
interest expenditure (+€22 billion). Of this in -
crease, €16 billion was attributable to discounts 
alone (see also the box on p. 71). Additional 
spending of €5½ billion on the reformed civic 
allowance was also a considerable factor.
Debt brake accounting for 2023 is proving ra -
ther complicated. The plan was to exceed the 
net borrowing ceiling in the core budget by 
€1.7 billion by making payments to the Flood 
Relief Fund under the escape clause. On bal -
ance, however, the deficit was now €6.6 billion 
lower. Moreover, the net borrowing permitted 
under the debt brake is €1.5 billion higher be -
cause a cyclical burden that was higher by this 
amount was calculated.14 On the other hand, 
€6.3 billion less was withdrawn from the re -
serves than envisaged, and coin seigniorage re -
mained a little below estimates. On balance, 
therefore, the debt brake limit was slightly 
undershot in arithmetical terms (by just under 
€0.2 billion, based on mid-  January data). In its 
debt brake accounting, however, the govern -
ment counted the transfer to the 2021 Flood Revision of 2023 
budget plan 
necessary after 
ruling
2023 budget 
outturn: more 
favourable than 
estimated in 
supplementary 
budget2023 budget 
outturn: sharp 
decline in deficit 
compared with 
2022
2023 budget 
outturn: core 
budget complies 
with debt brake 
in arithmetical 
terms despite 
emergency 
borrowing ; with -
drawals from 
reserves reduced 
by €6½ billion
12 According to the government’s projection from the au -
tumn of 2023, nominal GDP rose somewhat more strongly 
on account of inflation than in the autumn 2022 projec -
tion, which was the basis for the original budget plan for 
2023. Factoring in the acceleration in nominal growth, 
central government’s cyclical adjustment procedure calcu -
lated a much less unfavourable cyclical effect on the 2023 
central government budget. The scope for borrowing 
under the debt brake decreased accordingly.
13 As per the definition in the government finance statis -
tics, which includes gross tax revenue, revenue and ex -
penditure in the following differ from revenue and expend -
iture in the table on p. 69.
14 This was due to slightly lower nominal GDP growth as 
calculated using the data available in mid-  January.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
70

The steep rise in central government interest expenditure
Interest expenditure decreased for a long time 
in the low interest rate environment, reaching 
a low of €3½ billion in the 2021 central gov-
ernment budget. It rose sharply thereafter, 
hitting €38 billion last year.
But this is not the result of higher borrowing 
costs. The ECB Governing Council did raise 
key interest rates by 4½ percentage points, 
and capital market interest rates – the rates 
that are relevant for central government  – 
also rose signifi  cantly in the wake thereof. 
However, the resulting effective additional 
interest burden on central government in the 
2023 fi  nancial year remained limited. Specifi  c-
ally, the relevant bonds newly issued in 2022 
accounted for only a small part of central gov-
ernment debt (around €350 billion). The 
underlying interest rate (interest cost rate ac-
cording to the 2022 borrowing report) re-
mained relatively low, at 1.0%. Compared 
with the interest paid on matured debt instru-
ments, which was very low on balance, this 
resulted in additional annual interest expend-
iture (on an accruals basis) of just under 
€3½ billion (of which just over €1 billion was 
for net borrowing from 2022).1
This means that there are other reasons for 
the decidedly steep rise in interest expend-
iture. A signifi  cant contribution comes from 
provisions for redemptions of inflation- 
indexed debt instruments. While the relevant 
payments are not made until the debt instru-
ments mature, central government makes 
provisions by recording the annual infl  ation- 
driven redemption increase as interest ex-
penditure and setting this amount aside. With 
infl  ation-indexed Federal securities worth 
around €70 billion, interest expenditure of 
€8  billion was recorded in the core budget 
last year, compared with just over €½ billion 
in 2021.What ultimately play a decisive role are dis-
counts on the par value of newly issued debt 
instruments. As central government aims for 
each series of debt securities to be high in vol-
ume in order to secure the accompanying 
interest rate advantages, it sometimes opts for 
tap issues for an extended period of time. Tap 
issues of long- dated bonds may be priced at 
a  large discount when interest rates are on 
the rise. For the series with a 30- year term 
and a coupon of 0%, discounts sometimes 
amounted to around half of the bonds’ par 
value. As the central government budget does 
not allocate these discounts over the bonds’ 
term, i.e. it does not record them on an ac-
cruals basis, they place an enormous burden 
on interest expenditure in the year of issue. 
They amounted to €15 billion in 2023. Com-
pared with 2021, a year of large premia, inter-
est expenditure thus rose by almost €26 bil-
lion.
The Bundesbank has repeatedly proposed al-
locating premia and discounts on an accruals 
basis2 – as in the national accounts. This 
would smooth out interest expenditure con-
siderably. Fiscal policy would potentially be 
stabilised and the structural situation better 
captured. This would also make sense with re-
gard to the debt brake: the ceiling should 
refer to a value that refl  ects the structural 
budget situation.
1 Refi  nancing from 2021 had still been easing the bur-
den on the central government budget in the 2022 
fi  nancial year.
2 See, for example, Deutsche Bundesbank (2021).Interest expenditure and premia in 
central government budget
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank  estimates. 
1 Approximated  according  to  Federal  Ministry  of  Finance's 
2022 borrowing report. Besides premia, other components of 
interest expenditure (incl. accrued interest) are allocated on an 
accruals basis. Value for 2023 estimated.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 232010010203040
––++++€ billion
Interest expenditure 
as reported in budget
Interest
expenditure 
on accruals basis1
PremiaDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
71

Relief Fund (Actual: just under €1.4 billion) as 
having been financed by means of emergency 
borrowing via the escape clause.15 For this rea -
son, the future repayment requirement for 
emergency borrowing also additionally in -
creases by this amount. Adjusted for the trans -
fer to the Flood Relief Fund recorded in this 
way, the outturn was then just over €1.5 billion 
below the ceiling, and this amount is planned 
to be credited to the control account.2023: budget outturn for off- budget 
 entities
Central government’s off- budget entities16 
closed 2023 with a deficit of €23 billion (see 
the adjacent chart), making them a consider -
able €41 billion better off than envisaged back 
in December 2023. In 2022, the deficit stood at 
€31 billion.
– The ESF- E recorded a deficit of almost €42 
billion – €11 billion more than in the previ -
ous year. In addition to the transfers, par -
ticularly under the electricity and gas price 
brakes, interest expenditure of €2½ billion 
was also incurred. The outturn was just over 
€1½ billion more favourable than envisaged 
in the supplementary budget. The govern -
ment financed the deficit with additional 
emergency borrowing via the escape clause. 
However, the outstanding repayment bur -
den from emergency borrowing is now con -
siderably lower than at the end of 2022 
owing to the removal of reserves from the 
books. Actual outflows were only one- third 
of the level budgeted at that time in the 
ESF- E’s economic plan for 2023. Lower con -
tract prices set by utility companies brought 
down spending on energy price brakes par -
ticularly extensively. In addition, large 
planned capital injections to gas trading 
company Uniper were not required. Supple -
mentary energy price assistance played a 
negligible role, with the exception of in the 
hospital sector. The rest of the ESF recorded 
a surplus of €15 billion from repaid aid loans, 
following a deficit of €13 billion in 2022.
– The Climate Fund posted a deficit of €1½ 
billion, which was financed from the remain -
ing reserves. This is only a moderate deteri -
oration on the previous year if the core 
budget transfer of €6 billion, which was 
posted as revenue in 2022, is factored out. 2023 budget 
outturn for off- 
budget entities: 
large deficit, 
 particularly in 
ESF- E; planned 
figures signifi -
cantly undershot 
overallFiscal balances of central government's 
off-budget entities*
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fed-
eral Ministry of Finance. * Only entities using a single-entry ac-
counting  system,  i.e.  excluding,  in  particular,  the  bad  bank 
FMS Wertmanagement and, until the end of 2022, also SoFFin, 
which uses a single-entry accounting system and whose defi-
cits refinanced the bad bank's debts. 1 Precautionary fund for 
final payments of inflation-indexed Federal securities. 2 Climate 
and  Transformation  Fund;  up  to  2022,  Energy  and  Climate 
Fund. 3 The transfer of €16 billion from the core budget to the 
Flood Relief Fund was corrected by the removal of €14 billion 
in reserves following the Federal Constitutional Court's ruling 
in late 2023. 4 Excluding the transfer of € 60 billion from the 
core budget to the Climate Fund, which the Federal Constitu-
tional  Court  deemed  unconstitutional  in  its  ruling  of  15 
November 2023.
Deutsche Bundesbank2021 2022 2023604020020
–––+€ billion, quarterly figures
OtherFund for inflation-indexed securities1
Economic Stabilisation Fund
Armed Forces FundClimate Fund 2
Cumulated over the yearTotal
–60–40–200+203
34
4
15 See Federal Ministry of Finance (2024), pp. 26 f.
16 According to data from the Federal Ministry of Finance, 
i.e. excluding bad banks and other entities that use com -
mercial double- entry bookkeeping.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
72

Vis- à- vis the deficit of €14 billion in the eco -
nomic plan, additional revenue of €2½ bil -
lion from carbon emissions certificates 
brought some relief. What was far more im -
portant, however, was that actual outflows 
were once again only just over half of the 
level budgeted.
– The Precautionary Fund for Redemptions 
(for inflation- indexed Federal securities) and 
the civil servants’ pension fund recorded sur -
pluses of €4½ billion and €3½ billion, re -
spectively. The Financial Market Stabilisation 
Fund (SoFFin) posted a surplus of €4½ bil -
lion, mainly from loan repayments.17
2024 overview: central government and 
off- budget entities
For the current year, the plans for central gov -
ernment and its off- budget entities foresee a 
deficit of €101 billion (see the table on p. 69, 
item 21).18 Of this amount, €52 billion is attrib -
utable to off- budget entities, predominantly 
the Climate Fund and the Armed Forces Fund. 
The Climate Fund is to finance its deficit from 
reserves, while the Armed Forces Fund is ex -
empt from the debt brake. For the first time 
since 2020, central government thus plans to 
make no recourse to emergency borrowing via 
the escape clause.19
2024: plan for the core budget
Following the ruling of the Federal Constitu -
tional Court, legislators made significant adjust -
ments to the draft budget for 2024 drawn up 
last summer. In the core budget, the deficit 
now amounts to just over €49 billion. As in the 
summer draft budget, net borrowing is there -
fore at precisely the same level as the calcu -
lated upper limit of the debt brake. However, 
the deficit is €31 billion higher than originally 
planned (see the table on p. 69, item 3). This is 
due to several factors:
– The acquisition of additional financial assets 
make it possible to increase net borrowing by €16 billion (item 8, ibid.). These include a 
loan of €12 billion for the generational cap -
ital fund20 and a capital injection of €4½ bil -
lion to Deutsche Bahn for the railway net -
work.21
– In addition, according to the autumn projec -
tion, the cyclical component enables net 
borrowing to increase by just under €5½ bil -
lion (item 7).
– Since the Budget Act (Haushaltsgesetz)  was 
adopted in the new year, the credit limit is 
based on nominal GDP in 2023. The lower 
GDP of 2022 (the last year prior to the 
Budget Act) would otherwise have been 
used as a basis. As a result, the ceiling is €1 
billion higher (item 13).
2024: total 
deficit  of €101 
billion planned
Much larger 
core budget 
deficit  than 
envisaged back 
in summer17 This reflected the fact that the bad bank FMSW reduced 
its debt to the fund and therefore ultimately decreased 
consolidated central government debt, too. FMSW has 
been refinancing itself through SoFFin for a number of 
years now. SoFFin’s resulting deficits did not increase cen -
tral government debt overall, and were thus excluded from 
the balance of off- budget entities. Surpluses from repay -
ments, however, reduce central government debt and are 
included for this reason.
18 The deficit is expected to rise from €88 billion (Actual 
2023) to €101 billion. The increase is due to the fact that 
entities such as, in particular, the remainder of the ESF (de -
coupled from the ESF- E) posted a surplus of €24 billion on 
balance in 2023 (see the table on p. 69, item 19), but there 
are no figures for these entities in the central government 
budget plan for 2024. Adjusted for these specific off-  
budget entities, there is a moderate decline in the deficit.
19 However, it was signalled that this should be reviewed 
in the event of a major change, especially with regard to 
German aid for Ukraine. In addition, a smaller group of ex -
perts (from the Federal Court of Auditors, inter alia) ex -
pressed at a hearing before the Budget Committee their 
opinion that in the wake of the Federal Constitutional 
Court ruling, the debt brake should be settled again as it 
was prior to the introduction of a new accounting method 
for special funds in early 2022. According to this account -
ing method, even the approved budget would already ex -
ceed the debt brake limit (see the table on p. 69, item 12).
20 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023c).
21 The capital injection replaces investment grants from 
the Climate Fund and thus protects its remaining reserves. 
However, to date, the national accounts have not recorded 
such capital injections to Deutsche Bahn as financial trans -
actions, but rather as affecting the deficit. Additional infor -
mation: In the national accounts, there are plans to re -
assign Deutsche Bahn, in large part, to the general govern -
ment sector. Instead of the capital injection, the fiscal bal -
ance of these parts of Deutsche Bahn would then play a 
role in the central government deficit.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
73

– Furthermore, with an additional €9 billion, 
central government absorbs almost all of the 
remaining reserves in the core budget. Of 
this amount, €6½ billion stems from the 
better- than- planned budget outturn for 
2023 (item 5).
The planned deficit in the core budget is thus 
€15 billion lower than the Actual 2023 figure. 
The credit- financed loan for the generational 
capital fund will increase the budget deficit, 
but a loan of €6½ billion to the International 
Monetary Fund will not be paid out again. In 
addition, follow- on pandemic burdens from 
2023 will disappear. Interest expenditure will 
also fall as it includes a €12 billion reduction in 
burdens from discounts and inflation- indexed 
Federal securities. Furthermore, central govern -
ment will shift expenditure into off- budget en -
tities (not least military expenditure into the 
Armed Forces Fund) and use the Digitalisation 
Fund’s reserve of €4 billion in the core budget. 
Aside from this, it will cut its grants to the pen -
sion insurance scheme by €1 billion.
2024: plans for the off- budget entities
According to its accounting method, central 
government will also be in compliance with the 
debt brake when including its off- budget en -
tities. Borrowing is only anticipated for the 
Armed Forces Fund (see the table on p.  69, 
item 20), which is exempt from the debt brake. 
The other special funds are to finance their (in 
some cases considerable) deficits from their re -
serves. This applies, in particular, to the Climate 
Fund (item 17.a). However, the majority of the 
reserves concerned could only be formed by 
the government because borrowing authorisa -
tions were transferred from the core budget 
when the escape clause was activated. From an 
economic perspective, there are parallels with 
the reserves that had to be removed from the 
books following the ruling of the Federal Con -
stitutional Court. The Federal Government ap -
parently sees no legal conflict here, though.Overall, the finalised plans for the current year 
yield a deficit of €52 billion for the off- budget 
entities.22 Compared with the plans made back 
in summer, the most significant change is that 
the ESF- E was dissolved at the end of 2023. 
The energy price brakes expired at that point in 
time, and the core budget assumed the out -
standing burdens, in particular the interest bur -
den. As in the summer of 2023, sizeable def -
icits are planned for the other two large special 
funds.
– A deficit of €20 billion is estimated for the 
Armed Forces Fund. As planned back in 
summer, the fund is expected to cover the 
majority of procurement expenditure from 
the core budget. In addition, replacement 
purchases of €½ billion were estimated for 
materials delivered to Ukraine by the Ger -
man armed forces.
– A deficit of €29 billion is estimated for the 
Climate Fund – only €½ billion less than en -
visaged in the summer of 2023. Legislators 
made much steeper expenditure cuts, but 
the estimated €9½ billion global increase in 
revenue envisaged in summer did not ma -
terialise. Meanwhile, the additional increase 
in the price of national carbon emissions 
certificates (€5 higher per tonne) will only 
generate additional revenue of €1½ billion. 
The court ruling directly reduced the fund’s 
reserves by €60 billion. At year- end 2023, 
the government still recorded reserves of 
€29 billion. These are expected to be almost 
entirely exhausted this year. However, the 
medium- term plan from summer 2023 fore -
saw a deficit of €28 billion for 2025 as well. 
There is therefore still a considerable need 
for adjustment.
– The far smaller Digitalisation Fund is return -
ing its remaining reserves to the core budget. 
It will thus post a deficit of €4 billion.Core budget 
deficit projected 
to decline, but 
mainly due to 
special effects
No net borrow -
ing for off- 
budget entities 
under debt 
brake, but 
reserve- financed 
deficits persistESF- E dissolved; 
otherwise only 
limited changes 
to government 
plans from 
summer 
22 Surpluses are to be expected again for the special funds 
for which the central government budget does not report 
planned fiscal balances, including, for example, the civil 
servants’ pension fund and the COVID-  19 arm of the ESF.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
74

State government budgets23
2023 as a whole
The balance of state government core budgets 
saw a considerable deterioration of €15 billion 
last year. As the state governments had still 
posted a large surplus in 2022, however, they 
closed 2023 with only a slight deficit.24
Revenue fell by 2% (-€9 billion). Tax revenue 
declined by 1%. Collapsing revenue from real 
estate acquisition tax accruing to state govern -
ments placed a particular strain on their 
budgets (see p. 67). In addition, revenue from 
public administrations was 8% lower than in 
the previous year. These receipts had previously 
risen sharply due to central government chan -
nelling coronavirus aid through state govern -
ment budgets (mainly transfers to enterprises). 
The corresponding state government expend -
iture then likewise fell. Nonetheless, total ex -
penditure climbed by 1% (+€5 billion).25
Including their off- budget entities, state gov -
ernments may have closed 2023 broadly in bal -
ance (2022: surplus of €16 billion26). However, 
data for the year as a whole are not yet avail -
able. After three quarters, the balance for core 
budgets and off- budget entities combined was 
€19 billion less favourable than in the previous 
year.
Outlook for 2024
State government finances could deteriorate this 
year. Although state government taxes are likely 
to grow markedly, expenditure will probably rise 
more strongly than revenue. Price increases are 
still having a broad impact. The wage settlement 
of December 2023, together with comparable 
adjustments to civil servant salaries, entails a 
substantial increase in personnel expenditure. 
Furthermore, state governments intend to con -
tinue recruiting more staff. By comparison, trans -
fers to local government are likely to increase 
more slowly – in line with the weak tax develop -
ments of the previous year, in particular.Impact of the Federal Constitutional 
Court’s ruling on state governments
Many state governments made use of emer -
gency borrowing during the pandemic to build 
up reserves for expenditure in subsequent 
years. An official overview of their size is not Core state 
government  
budgets with a 
slight deficit in 
2023 – consider -
able deterior -
ation on 2022
Decline in rev -
enue set against 
moderate rise in 
expenditure
Including off- 
budget entities, 
state govern -
ments may have 
closed 2023 
broadly in 
balance 
Deficit to be 
expected for 
state govern -
ments this yearState govern -
ments have 
large reserves 
from emergency 
borrowingState government fiscal balance
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 
1 Figure calculated using monthly cash statistics on the core 
budgets from the Federal Ministry of Finance; quarterly data, 
which also encompass data on the off-budget entities, are not 
yet available. 2 Core budgets and off-budget entities together.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4201001020
––++
2021Quarterly figures
2023
2022€ billion
Cumulated from start of year 2
20231
–100+10+20+30
2022
2021Off-budget entitiesCore budgets
23 The information on the core budgets is based on the 
monthly cash statistics.
24 At the beginning of 2023, the monthly cash statistics 
showed a surplus of €14 billion for 2022 in the core 
budgets, whereas the cumulative quarterly data in mid-  
2023 only put this figure at just over €10 billion. It seems 
that individual state governments retroactively booked 
transfers to off- budget entities and thus shifted borrowing 
authorisations. In view of the Federal Constitutional Court’s 
ruling in November, it appears possible that they may re -
verse some of these bookings.
25 In 2022, central government transferred funds of 
around €19 billion to state governments for coronavirus 
aid, which the state governments then forwarded. After 
adjustment for these central government transfers, state 
government expenditure rose by around 5%. Since the 
state governments had also used some of their own funds 
for coronavirus response measures in 2022 (which were 
absent in 2023), the fully adjusted rate is even higher.
26 Adjusted for missing revenue entries amounting to €3½ 
billion in Saarland. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023d), 
p. 41.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
75

available. The Bundesbank performed make -
shift calculations to gauge their volume as at 
year- end 2022.27 In 2023, some state govern -
ments were still planning to build up additional 
reserves until the Federal Constitutional Court’s 
ruling in November. If these are taken into ac -
count, the reserves from emergency borrowing 
might have stood at around €30 billion at this 
point in time.
The Federal Constitutional Court’s ruling states 
that emergency borrowing cannot be used 
over multiple years. This means that state gov -
ernments have to adjust their plans if they in -
clude the use of such reserves. Brandenburg, Bremen, Saarland, Saxony-  Anhalt and 
Schleswig-  Holstein, for example, all declared 
another state of emergency following the rul -
ing, thus justifying the use of emergency bor -
rowing. This mostly also applies to the current 
year. An alternative course of action is to re -
lease reserves financed through emergency 
borrowing. For instance, Mecklenburg-  West 
Pomerania dissolved a special fund that it had 
previously filled with funds from emergency 
borrowing. Adjustments are likely to follow in 
other federal states, too.
Social security funds
Pension insurance scheme
2023 as a whole
The statutory pension insurance scheme re -
corded a surplus of €1 billion in 2023 (prelimin -
ary data). This was €2½ billion lower than in 
the previous year. Thanks to the surplus, the 
sustainability reserve was up to €45 billion at 
the end of 2023, leaving it at just under €40 
billion above the statutory minimum.
Total revenue rose by 5%. At 5½%, growth in 
contribution receipts was somewhat stronger, 
even though a large volume of tax and social 
contribution- exempt inflation compensation 
bonuses were paid out to employees. Expend -
iture rose at a slightly higher rate (5½%) than 
revenue. On average across the year, pensions 
increased by 5%.28 The number of pensions 
continued to experience only moderate growth.
Outlook for 2024
The pension insurance scheme’s finances will 
probably remain almost unchanged this year. 
Expenditure is likely to rise to a similar extent as 
in 2023. The significant pension increase of Federal Constitu -
tional Court’s 
ruling restricts 
reserves for 
state govern -
ments, tooReduced surplus 
in 2023, further 
increase in 
reserves
Substantial rise 
in contribution 
receipts and 
pensionsFinances of the German statutory 
pension insurance scheme*
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). * Preliminary quarterly figures. The 
final  annual  figures  differ  from  the  total  of  the  reported  
quarterly figures as the latter are not revised.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4420246
––+++
–6–4–20+2+4Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year202320222021
2022
2023
20212021 2022 202302468
2021 2022 202302468 Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
27 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023d).
28 For more information on the pension increase, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023e), p. 67.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
76

Higher retirement age alleviates demographic burdens
The Federal Government is preparing a reform 
of the statutory pension insurance scheme 
which would see the replacement rate remain 
at the current level of 48% until 2039. Under 
existing legislation, the replacement rate is set 
to decline after 2025. Such a reform therefore 
puts additional pressure on the contribution 
rate to the statutory pension insurance 
scheme and on central government fi  nances. 
The Federal Government does not intend to 
raise the statutory retirement age any further 
after 2030, at which point it will remain at 67 
years. However, the planned higher pensions 
would be much easier to fund if the retire-
ment age were linked to life expectancy as of 
2031. If people enter retirement later, this 
boosts employment, economic growth and 
individual pension benefi  ts calculated on the 
basis of income from employment. At the 
same time, a larger contribution base makes it 
easier to fi  nance pensions, which also eases 
the burden on other branches of social secur-
ity and the federal budget. A number of na-
tional and international bodies therefore rec-
ommend that Germany introduce such a link.1
Data2 from the statutory pension insurance 
scheme show how insured persons are adjust-
ing to a higher statutory retirement age, with 
the actual retirement age following the statu-
tory retirement age fairly closely3:
– A large proportion of insured persons enter 
retirement upon reaching the applicable 
statutory retirement age (see the upper 
part of the adjacent chart). The statutory 
retirement age was 65 in 2012 and has been gradually rising since then; in 2022 it 
was just under 66 years.
– The introduction of a deduction- free pen-
sion from the age of 63 for qualifying indi-
viduals led to a large reduction in the num-
ber of people retiring at the statutory re-
tirement age. In 2012, around 80% of 
newly retiring old- age pensioners retired at 
the statutory retirement age, but by 2022 
this fi  gure had fallen to 40%.
– The deduction- free pension as of the age 
of 63 was introduced as a special provision 
for people with an exceptionally long pen-
sion contribution history of at least 45 
years. It was launched in mid- 2014. Ini-
tially, it was possible to draw on a 
deduction- free pension as of the age of 
63. By 2022, the minimum age had risen to 
64. The introduction of this deduction- free 
pension saw a surge in the proportion of 
people retiring early. Up to the current end, 
1 The German Council of Economic Experts has called 
for this again recently; see German Council of Eco-
nomic Experts (2023), chapter 5, pp. 21ff.
2 See FDZ- RV – Forschungsdatenzentrum der Renten-
versicherung (2012, 2017, 2022).
3 At the same time, the data do not provide any indi-
cation that insured persons are becoming more willing 
to accept deductions to their pensions on account of 
the rising retirement age, or that pensions are lower as 
a result. The average number of months between ac-
tual retirement and the statutory retirement age has 
remained broadly unchanged since 2012.Entry into retirement and statutory 
retirement age*
Sources:  FDZ-RV  and  German  statutory  pension  insurance 
scheme  (Deutsche  Rentenversicherung).  * Persons  accessing 
the  following  types  of  pension  are  not  taken  into  account: 
pension  for  persons  with  reduced  earning  capacity,  old-age 
pension for disabled persons (Section 37 of the Sixth Book of 
the Social Security Code (Sozialgesetzbuch  VI  – SGB VI), old-
age pension due to unemployment (Section 237 of the Sixth 
Book of the Social Security Code) and old-age pension for wo-
men  (Section  237a  of  the  Sixth  Book  of  the  Social  Security 
Code). In addition, persons entering retirement were only in-
cluded if drawing on an old-age pension for the first time.
Deutsche Bundesbank60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 680255075100
2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 202264.064.565.065.566.0Average age upon retirementEntry into retirement
As a percentage of all 
persons retiring per year
Excluding those with
exceptionally long 
contribution historyStatutory retirement age
All insured personsAge2012
2017
2022Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
77

mid- 2023 will make itself felt until mid- 2024 
(nationwide average of just over 4½%). Ac -
cording to the 2023 pension insurance report, 
pensions could increase more weakly in mid-  
2024, by 3½%. However, the number of pen -
sions is expected to grow somewhat more 
strongly than in the previous year. Furthermore, 
expenditure will go up due to the fact that 
those who entered retirement owing to a re -
duction in earning capacity between 2001 and 
2018 are to receive a blanket rise in pensions 
from mid- 2024 onwards (almost €1½ billion).
Contribution receipts are likely to grow sub -
stantially. Relatively high wage increases are on 
the cards, and tax and social contribution-  
exempt inflation compensation bonuses are 
likely to play a somewhat less significant role. 
Central government grants are largely tied to 
wage developments in 2022 and would in -
crease by around 5% this year. However, cen -
tral government is cutting these grants by just over €1 billion in order to ease the burden on 
its own budget.29
The pension insurance scheme should be 
financed in a way that is transparent and read -
ily comprehensible. It would therefore be advis -
able to have a rule- based system for providing 
central government grants that is not depend -
ent on central government’s current budgetary 
situation.30 Rather, central government should 
name and quantify benefits that it deems not 
to be contribution- related. These benefits 
would need be financed from central govern -
ment grants. Any further central government 
grants for the general stabilisation of the pen -
sion insurance scheme would then be easy to 
identify.Finances largely 
unchanged in 
2024: substan -
tial rise in 
expenditure 
and …
… revenue; cen -
tral government 
grants cutAdvisable: rule- 
based alignment 
of central 
government  
grants with  non- 
contribution- 
related benefitsthose entering retirement on this basis 
have made up a relatively high share of all 
new pensioners, at around 30%. At the 
same time, the age at which the bulk of 
early retirees enter retirement has gradually 
risen, mirroring the likewise increasing min-
imum age for a deduction- free pension 
(see the lines for 2017 and 2022 in the 
upper part of the chart, for example). It ap-
pears that a fairly small proportion of in-
sured persons still retire as early as possible 
(at the age of 63) and accept pension de-
ductions in return.
– All in all, the introduction of the deduction- 
free pension at the age of 63 led to an ini-
tial marked reduction in the effective aver-
age retirement age (see the lower part of 
the chart). Over the remainder of the 
period under review, too, the possibility of 
drawing a deduction- free pension damp-
ened the increase in the effective average 
retirement age, which only increased by 
just over ½ year from 2012 to 2022. Ex-
cluding those with an exceptionally long contribution history, the effective average 
retirement age in 2022 was just over 65 
years, which – much like the statutory re-
tirement age – is one year higher than in 
2012.
Other data from the German statutory pen-
sion insurance scheme show that the share of 
insured persons receiving a pension for re-
duced earning capacity prior to the statutory 
retirement age has not risen over the same 
period.4 In this respect, the data do not reveal 
any impact of the signifi  cant rise in the size of 
the pension for reduced earnings capacity. 
The relatively stable share of people drawing 
on such a pension is consistent with studies 
showing that higher life expectancy, on the 
whole, goes hand in hand with better health 
at a given age.5
4 See German statutory pension insurance scheme 
(2023).
5 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2019), p. 74.
29 It is already a legal requirement for central government 
grants to be reduced by €600 million per year between 
2024 and 2027. The Bundesrat has not yet approved the 
plan to cut them by a further €600 million per year in the 
same period.
30 This was also argued recently by the Social Advisory 
Council (2023).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
78

Longer- term outlook
From the mid- 2020s onwards, the demo -
graphic financing pressures on the pension in -
surance scheme will grow significantly. This 
was made clear, not least, by the pension insur -
ance report published by the Federal Govern -
ment at the end of 2023. According to this re -
port, the contribution rate will jump to 19.9% 
in 2029 and will rise further to 21.1% by the 
end of the simulation in 2037. The contribution 
rate currently stands at 18.6%. The replace -
ment rate is a key metric for expenditure. This 
will remain stable at 48% until 2025. Under 
current legislation, the 48% minimum thresh -
old will expire at the end of 2025. The replace -
ment rate will subsequently decline significantly 
to 45% by 2037.
However, the Federal Government has an -
nounced its intention to extend the minimum 
threshold for the replacement rate until 2039.31 
This would significantly increase the financing 
pressures on the pension insurance scheme: 
the contribution rate would then be likely to 
rise by almost 2 percentage points more in the 
period up to 2040. The resulting increase in 
central government grants would place add -
itional pressure on the central government 
budget. The generational capital fund also 
planned by the Federal Government will prob -
ably do little to change this.32
Federal Employment Agency
2023 as a whole
In 2023, the Federal Employment Agency 
posted a surplus of €3 billion.33 This consti -
tuted a year- on- year improvement of just over 
€2½ billion. This was mainly due to the fact 
that federal legislators had raised the contribu -
tion rate to the unemployment insurance 
scheme by 0.2 percentage point to 2.6% at the 
beginning of the year. This generated add -
itional revenue of almost €3 billion. The core 
budget, which is financed by contributions, posted a surplus of €3½ billion. From this sur -
plus, the Federal Employment Agency repaid a 
central government loan of €½ billion from 
2022 and transferred the remainder to its free 
reserves, which it had used up during the 
coronavirus crisis. Taken together, the pay- as- 
you- go benefit areas of insolvency benefit and Growing demo -
graphic burdens: 
sharp rise in 
contribution 
rate, although 
replacement 
rate to decrease 
significantly 
after 2025
Announced 
extension of 
minimum 
threshold for 
replacement 
rate would con -
siderably inten -
sify financing 
pressures
2023: Federal 
Employment 
Agency with sig -
nificant surplus 
due to higher 
contribution rateFinances of the 
Federal Employment Agency*
Source: Federal Employment Agency. * Including transfers to 
the civil servants' pension fund and before payment of central 
government grants.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q410505
––+
–25–20–15–10–50+5Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year202320222021
20212023
20222021 2022 2023–40–200+20+40+60+80+100
2021 2022 20234020020406080100
––+++++ Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
31 See Federal Government of Germany (2023). The coali -
tion agreement envisaged a permanent minimum thresh -
old.
32 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023c) for information on 
long- term projections and the generational capital fund.
33 In the core budget, i.e. excluding the civil servants’ pen -
sion fund. Transfers to the fund lower the core budget bal -
ance. The civil servants’ pension fund posted a broadly bal -
anced budget, following a deficit of €½ billion in 2022. At 
the end of 2023, its funds amounted to €8 billion.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
79

winter employment compensation posted a 
deficit of €½ billion in 2023. Their reserves 
stood at just under €3 billion at the end of the 
year.
The Federal Employment Agency’s revenue 
rose very sharply, by 12%. Meanwhile, the pace 
of growth in contribution receipts was some -
what faster still, at 14%. Just under 9 percent -
age points of this rise was attributable to the 
higher contribution rate. Growth in overall rev -
enue was dampened markedly by the fall of 
one- third in the insolvency benefit contribution 
rate, to 0.06%.
At +4½%, expenditure was significantly higher 
than in the previous year. Spending on un -
employment benefits rose by 13%. Although 
the decline in expenditure on short- time work 
(-74%) largely offset this increase, outlays for 
active labour market policy grew by 7%. Spend -
ing on insolvency benefit rose sharply, by €½ 
billion, starting from a comparatively low level 
in the previous year. The Federal Employment 
Agency resumed the transfer to its civil ser -
vants’ pension fund (€½ billion). These trans -
fers had been suspended between 2020 and 
2022.
Outlook for 2024
The Federal Employment Agency expects its 
finances to deteriorate somewhat this year, an -ticipating a surplus of €2 billion in its core 
budget. Its planned revenue is 5½% higher 
than the 2023 annual figure. On the expend -
iture side, outlays are expected to increase by a 
total of 9% compared with the previous year’s 
figure. Spending on unemployment benefits, a 
major expenditure item, is projected to increase 
by 5½%. In addition, the Federal Employment 
Agency expects its expenditure on active la -
bour market policy to be substantially higher 
(+20%, or +€1½ billion). Furthermore, it plans 
to transfer an additional €½ billion to the civil 
servants’ pension fund.34
As things stand, the planned surplus of the 
Federal Employment Agency appears plausible. 
The economic slowdown now seems likely to 
last for a somewhat longer period. As a result, 
labour market developments are also expected 
to be somewhat less favourable than was as -
sumed in the autumn of 2023. This will put 
pressure on the Federal Employment Agency’s 
finances in comparison with its plans. However, 
the Federal Employment Agency has tradition -
ally tended to have quite generous expenditure 
appropriations for active labour market policy, 
which means that the planned balance should 
still be achievable.Revenue up very 
sharply
Significant 
expenditure 
growthSomewhat 
smaller surplus 
planned for 
2024
Planned surplus 
still plausible
List of references
Bańkowski, K., C. Checherita-  Westphal, J. Jesionek and P . Muggenthaler (2023), The effects of 
high inflation on public finances in the euro area, ECB Occasional Paper Series, No 332, December 
2023.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a), Federal Constitutional Court issues ruling on debt brake, Monthly 
Report, November 2023, pp. 69-71.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b), Public finances, Monthly Report, November 2023, pp. 61-85.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023c), The plan to introduce a generational capital fund to ease pressures 
on the pension scheme’s finances, Monthly Report, November 2023, pp. 79-81.34 The allocation rate rose in 2024. It increased from 
96.6% to 147.7% of civil servants’ pensionable remuner -
ation.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
80

Deutsche Bundesbank (2023d), State government finances in 2022: high surplus overall, some 
states still making extensive recourse to emergency borrowing, Monthly Report, October 2023, 
pp. 39-63.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023e), Public finances, Monthly Report, May 2023, pp. 57-75.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a), Inflation- induced bracket creep in the income tax scale, Monthly 
Report, June 2022, pp. 63-73.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022b), Central government’s debt brake: options for stability- oriented 
further development, Monthly Report, April 2022, pp. 49-66.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021), Federal debt: allocate premia on accruals basis in budgetary interest 
expenditure, Monthly Report, June 2021, pp. 47-51.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019), Health aspects of rising life expectancy, Monthly Report, October, 
2019, p. 74.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2016), Key central government budget data in connection with the debt 
brake, Monthly Report, February 2016, pp. 68-69.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2006), A disaggregated framework for analysing public finances: Germany’s  
fiscal track record between 2000 and 2005, Monthly Report, March 2006, pp. 61-76.
Deutsche Rentenversicherung (2023), Rentenversicherung im Zeitrechte, DRV-  Schriften, Vol. 22, 
October 2023.
European Commission (2023), Commission Opinion on the Draft Budgetary Plan of Germany, 
November 2023, https://economy-finance.ec.europa.eu/economic-and-fiscal-governance/
stability-and-growth-pact/annual-draft-budgetary-plans-dbps-euro-area-countries/
draft-budgetary-plans-2024_en#germany
FDZ- RV – Forschungsdatenzentrum der Rentenversicherung (2022), SUF – Versichertenrenten-
zugang 2022.
FDZ- RV – Forschungsdatenzentrum der Rentenversicherung (2017), SUF – Versichertenrenten-
zugang 2017.
FDZ- RV – Forschungsdatenzentrum der Rentenversicherung (2012), SUF – Versichertenrenten-
zugang 2012.
Federal Government of Germany (2023), Zum Haushalt 2024, press release, No 280, December 
2023.
Federal Ministry of Finance (2024), Vorläufiger Abschluss des Bundeshaushalts 2023, Monats-
bericht, January 2024, pp. 22-42.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
81

German Council of Economic Experts (2024), Die Schuldenbremse nach dem BVerfG- Urteil: 
Flexibilität  erhöhen – Stabilität wahren, policy brief, No 1/ 2024, January 2024.
German Council of Economic Experts (2023), Overcoming sluggish growth – investing in the 
future , Annual Report 2023-2024, December 2023.
Independent Advisory Board of the Stability Council (2024), Außerordentliche Stellungnahme des 
Beirats zur 28. Sitzung des Stabilitätsrates 12/ 2023, January 2024, https://www.stabilitaetsrat.de/
DE/Beirat/Dokumente/Dokumente_node.html
Social Advisory Council (2023), Gutachten des Sozialbeirats, Jahresgutachten 2023, November 
2023.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
82

Statistical  
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
1•

Contents
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5 •
2. External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5 •
3. General economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6 •
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8 •
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10 •
3. Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14 •
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18 •
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche 
Bundes bank) in Germany  .............................................................................................  20 •
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24 •
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26 •
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28 •
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30 •
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32 •
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34 •
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36 •
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36 •
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38 •
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38 •
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39 •
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
2•

V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42 •
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42 •
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest  ....................................................................  43 •
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43 •
3. Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43 •
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44 •
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49 •
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50 •
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51 •
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52 •
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52 •
5. Yields on German securities  .........................................................................................  53 •
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53 •
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54 •
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55 •
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56 •
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57 •
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  .. 58 •
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  ........................................................................................................  58 •
3. General government: budgetary development  .............................................................  59 •
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59 •
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60 •
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
3•

7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61 •
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ....... 61 •
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62 •
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62 •
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63 •
12. Maastricht debt by creditor  .........................................................................................  63 •
13. Maastricht debt by instrument .....................................................................................  64 •
14. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category  ............................  65 •
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  66 •
2. Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  67 •
3. Orders received by industry  .........................................................................................  68 •
4. Orders received by construction  ..................................................................................  69 •
5. Retail trade turnover  ....................................................................................................  69 •
6. Labour market  .............................................................................................................  70 •
7. Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  71 •
8. Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  72 •
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  72 •
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  73 •
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  74 •
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  75 •
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  76 •
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  77 •
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ................................  78 •
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............  78 •
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  79 •
7. External position of the Bundesbank ............................................................................  80 •
8. External positions of enterprises  ..................................................................................  81 •
9. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  82 •
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage of 
Economic  and Monetary Union  ...................................................................................  82 •
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  83 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
5•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
M3 3
M1 M23-month
moving average
(centred)MFI lending,
totalMFI lending to
enterprises
and
householdsMonetary
capital
formation  4 €STR  5,6Yield on Euro-
pean govern-
ment bonds
outstanding  7
Period Annual percentage change % p.a. as a monthly average
2022 May 8.3 6.3 6.1 6.2 6.2 5.1 – 0.1 – 0.59 1.7
June 7.5 6.2 6.0 6.0 6.3 5.4 – 0.2 – 0.58 2.2
July 7.0 6.1 5.8 6.0 5.9 5.4 – 0.2 – 0.51 1.9
Aug. 6.8 6.3 6.2 6.0 5.7 5.7 – 0.3 – 0.09 1.8
Sep. 5.2 5.9 6.0 5.7 5.5 5.7 – 0.3 0.36 2.6
Oct. 3.5 5.0 4.9 5.2 5.1 5.3 – 0.7 0.66 3.0
Nov. 2.1 4.5 4.6 4.4 4.8 5.2 – 0.1 1.37 2.7
Dec. 0.2 3.4 3.8 3.8 3.9 4.4 0.6 1.57 2.8
2023 Jan. – 1.3 2.5 3.0 3.1 3.0 3.7 1.3 1.90 2.9
Feb. – 3.1 1.7 2.5 2.5 2.5 3.3 1.9 2.28 3.0
Mar. – 4.7 1.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.9 2.4 2.57 3.1
Apr. – 5.7 0.5 1.4 1.5 1.4 2.4 2.4 2.90 3.0
May – 7.0 – 0.1 1.0 0.9 0.9 2.3 3.3 3.08 3.0
June – 8.0 – 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.4 1.6 3.6 3.24 3.0
July – 9.1 – 1.4 – 0.4 – 0.4 0.1 1.3 4.0 3.40 3.1
Aug. – 10.4 – 2.4 – 1.3 – 0.9 – 0.2 0.7 4.5 3.64 3.2
Sep. – 9.9 – 2.2 – 1.2 – 1.2 – 0.4 0.3 4.9 3.75 3.3
Oct. – 10.0 – 2.2 – 1.0 – 1.0 – 0.5 0.4 5.6 3.90 3.5
Nov. – 9.5 – 1.9 – 0.9 – 0.6 – 0.6 0.3 5.5 3.90 3.3
Dec. – 8.5 – 0.9 0.1 ... – 0.3 0.5 5.1 3.90 2.7
2024 Jan. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3.90 2.8
1 Source: ECB.  2 Seasonally adjusted.  3 Excluding money market fund shares/units,
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by
non-euro area residents.  4 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs.  5 EuroShort-Term Rate.  6 See also footnotes to Table VI.3, p. 43●. 7 GDP-weighted yield on
ten-year government bonds. Countries included: DE, FR, NL, BE, AT, FI, IE, PT, ES, IT,
GR, SK, CY, SI.
2. External transactions and positions *
Selected items of the euro area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate  3
Balanceof which:
Goods BalanceDirect
investmentPortfolio
investmentFinancial
derivatives  2Other
investmentReserve
assetsReference
rate 
vis-á-vis the
US dollar Nominal Real  4
Period € million EUR 1 = USD ... Q1 1999 = 100
2022 May –29,047 – 8,030 +63,713 +116,343 +38,075 + 555 –92,425 + 1,165 1.0579 95.4 90.5
June – 3,894 – 8,502 + 8,081 + 7,902 –98,776 + 6,263 +90,785 + 1,906 1.0566 95.7 90.7
July –12,413 –13,267 +21,794 –12,151 +46,387 + 9,947 –24,023 + 1,634 1.0179 93.9 89.2
Aug. –26,215 –30,821 – 7,004 –24,607 –60,652 +14,505 +61,593 + 2,158 1.0128 93.4 88.9
Sep. – 4,932 –12,954 –29,124 +83,487 –166,369 +13,773 +36,514 + 3,470 0.9904 93.9 89.9
Oct. –14,084 – 7,689 +19,115 +10,575 –21,581 + 3,622 +22,577 + 3,923 0.9826 94.5 91.3
Nov. + 6,620 + 7,538 –19,957 – 6,043 –29,853 + 4,294 +11,130 + 515 1.0201 95.7 92.3
Dec. +16,618 +10,484 +61,518 +27,760 +64,795 – 7,854 –27,989 + 4,805 1.0589 96.8 92.6
2023 Jan. –11,898 –14,614 +23,259 – 1,623 +30,752 – 2,671 + 5,548 – 8,747 1.0769 97.1 92.8
Feb. +12,209 +21,058 –11,665 +32,164 –25,271 +12,381 –19,593 –11,347 1.0715 97.0 93.1
Mar. +30,117 +39,164 +27,851 + 3,447 –101,886 + 5,553 +119,277 + 1,460 1.0706 97.3 93.2
Apr. + 7,608 + 6,740 –14,564 –15,967 +65,460 – 1,372 –60,820 – 1,866 1.0968 98.4 94.2
May – 5,275 +15,347 –14,876 –55,930 +49,343 + 7,307 –16,952 + 1,356 1.0868 98.0 93.6
June +35,974 +32,124 +79,198 +79,946 –47,138 –10,711 +54,708 + 2,393 1.0840 98.2 93.8
July +31,244 +21,430 +32,923 –26,345 +47,313 – 8,869 +20,420 + 404 1.1058 99.2 95.0
Aug. +30,615 +21,338 +21,461 +11,866 –12,167 + 3,277 +17,175 + 1,310 1.0909 99.0 95.1
Sep. +35,036 +24,844 +46,023 +24,998 –61,134 + 2,181 +83,846 – 3,868 1.0684 98.5 94.7
Oct. +28,418 +32,098 +22,202 +16,509 –12,952 +17,101 – 2,182 + 3,728 1.0563 98.0 p 94.1
Nov. +31,708 +38,062 +70,988 – 3,262 +51,414 + 1,896 +19,431 + 1,508 1.0808 98.7 p 94.6
Dec. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0903 98.2 p 94.0
2024 Jan. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0905 98.4 p 94.1
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund's Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Monthly averages, see also Tables
XII. 9 and 11, pp. 82●/ 83●.  2 Including employee stock options.  3 Bundesbank cal-culation. Vis-á-vis the currencies of the extended EER group of tranding partners (fixed
composition).  4 Based on consumer price indices.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
6•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
3. General economic indicators
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Croatia Latvia
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
2021 5.9 6.9 3.2 7.2 2.8 6.4 8.4 15.1 8.3 13.8 6.7
2022 3.4 3.0 1.8 –0.5 1.6 2.5 5.6 9.4 3.7 6.4 3.4
2023 ... ... –0.3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
2022 Q3 2.5 2.0 1.2 –0.5 1.3 1.3 3.7 9.4 2.5 5.5 0.8
Q4 1.9 1.4 0.2 –4.2 –0.5 0.3 3.7 10.2 1.3 3.2 1.6
2023 Q1 1.3 1.7 0.3 –3.7 0.6 1.1 2.0 2.6 2.3 1.6 –0.0
Q2 0.6 1.3 –0.4 –2.9 –0.6 0.7 2.8 –0.3 0.0 2.6 –1.1
Q3 0.0 1.4 –0.7 –2.5 –1.5 0.3 1.8 –5.8 –0.0 2.8 –0.7
Q4 0.1 ... –0.4 –3.0 ... 0.6 ... –3.4 ... ... –0.5
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
2021 8.9 16.8 4.6 12.8 4.2 5.9 10.4 28.3 12.2 6.3 6.5
2022 2.3 –0.7 –0.3 –2.3 4.0 –0.2 2.5 18.9 0.4 1.6 0.8
2023 –2.4 –5.2 p–1.7 –10.7 –1.5 0.7 2.3 p–7.2 –2.5 –0.1 –4.5
2022 Q3 3.4 –3.6 1.9 –5.0 3.4 0.2 3.9 21.0 0.0 2.5 –2.6
Q4 2.2 –0.2 –0.6 –10.4 –0.4 –0.4 –1.7 29.8 –2.2 –1.4 –1.2
2023 Q1 0.3 –2.9 0.4 –9.7 0.9 –0.5 2.3 7.8 –1.5 –1.7 –6.0
Q2 –1.2 –4.3 –0.3 –14.3 –2.9 1.5 1.2 4.2 –3.9 0.1 –6.6
Q3 –4.8 –6.9 –3.1 –11.6 –1.8 0.8 –0.2 –21.6 –2.6 –0.4 –5.3
Q4 –3.9 –6.7 p–4.0 –7.1 –2.1 1.2 6.0 p–12.8 –2.0 1.6 –0.1
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
2021 81.6 80.1 84.9 78.1 81.2 81.1 75.6 78.0 78.0 75.0 75.3
2022 82.4 79.1 85.2 71.7 81.0 81.8 75.9 79.8 80.1 77.0 75.1
2023 80.7 75.8 83.4 67.3 76.6 81.2 75.2 ... 78.1 77.2 72.9
2022 Q4 81.7 77.3 84.9 71.4 80.7 80.6 75.4 79.8 79.2 74.7 73.3
2023 Q1 81.6 76.7 84.6 71.4 78.9 81.0 74.7 79.2 79.3 77.6 72.7
Q2 81.4 77.3 84.2 70.7 76.4 82.0 73.9 ... 78.7 78.0 73.8
Q3 80.1 75.1 82.9 62.4 77.4 80.6 76.3 ... 77.6 78.3 72.7
Q4 79.7 73.9 81.9 64.6 73.6 81.3 75.8 ... 76.8 74.8 72.3
2024 Q1 79.1 74.0 81.3 65.8 73.3 81.0 73.3 ... 75.5 76.1 71.4
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
2021 7.7 e 6.3 3.6 e 6.2 e 7.7 e 7.9 e 14.8 e 6.3 e 9.5 e 7.6 e 7.6
2022 6.7 e 5.5 p 3.1 e 5.6 e 6.8 e 7.3 e 12.5 e 4.5 e 8.1 e 6.8 e 6.9
2023 6.5 e 5.5 p 3.0 e 6.4 e 7.2 e 7.3 e 10.7 e 4.3 e 7.6 e 6.4 e 6.4
2023 Aug. 6.5 5.3 3.0 7.3 7.3 7.4 10.4 4.4 7.4 6.5 6.6
Sep. 6.5 5.4 3.1 6.5 7.4 7.3 10.2 4.6 7.5 6.5 6.5
Oct. 6.5 5.6 3.1 6.2 7.5 7.3 9.3 4.5 7.6 6.5 6.5
Nov. 6.4 5.6 3.1 6.3 7.6 7.3 9.4 4.5 7.4 6.4 6.6
Dec. 6.4 5.7 3.1 6.3 7.5 7.3 9.2 4.5 7.2 6.4 6.6
2024 Jan. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4.5 ... ... ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2021 2.6 3.2 5 3.2 4.5 2.1 2.1 0.6 2.4 1.9 2.7 3.2
2022 8.4 10.3 8.7 19.4 7.2 5.9 9.3 8.1 8.7 10.7 17.2
2023 6 5.4 2.3 6.0 9.1 4.3 5.7 4.2 5.2 5.9 8.4 9.1
2023 Aug. 5.2 2.4 6.4 4.3 3.1 5.7 3.5 4.9 5.5 8.4 5.6
Sep. 4.3 0.7 4.3 3.9 3.0 5.7 2.4 5.0 5.6 7.4 3.6
Oct. 2.9 –1.7 3.0 5.0 2.4 4.5 3.8 3.6 1.8 6.7 2.3
Nov. 2.4 –0.8 2.3 4.1 0.7 3.9 2.9 2.5 0.6 5.5 1.1
Dec. 2.9 0.5 3.8 4.3 1.3 4.1 3.7 3.2 0.5 5.4 0.9
2024 Jan. e 2.8 e 1.5 3.1 e 5.0 e 0.7 3.4 e 3.2 e 2.7 e 0.9 e 4.8 1.1
General government financial balance 7
As a percentage of GDP
2021 –5.2 –5.4 –3.6 –2.5 –2.8 –6.5 –7.0 –1.5 –8.8 –2.5 –7.2
2022 –3.6 –3.5 –2.5 –1.0 –0.8 –4.8 –2.4 1.7 –8.0 0.1 –4.6
2023 ... ... –2.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
General government debt 7
As a percentage of GDP
2020 97.2 111.8 68.8 18.6 74.7 114.6 207.0 58.1 154.9 86.8 42.2
2021 94.7 108.0 69.0 17.8 72.5 112.9 195.0 54.4 147.1 78.1 44.0
2022 90.9 104.3 66.1 18.5 73.3 111.8 172.6 44.4 141.7 68.2 41.0
Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, European Central Bank, Federal Statistical
Office, Bundesbank calculations. Latest data are partly based on press reports and areprovisional.  1 Euro area: quarterly data seasonally and calendar adjusted.  2 Manu-
facturing, mining and energy: adjusted for working-day variations.  3 Manufacturing:

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
7•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
6.3 7.2 12.6 6.2 4.2 5.7 4.8 8.2 6.4 9.9 2021
2.4 1.4 8.2 4.3 4.8 6.8 1.7 2.5 5.8 5.1 2022
... ... ... 0.1 ... ... ... 1.6 2.5 ... 2023
2.1 2.1 6.4 3.0 2.0 5.0 1.5 0.9 5.5 4.2 2022 Q3
0.1 –2.5 7.3 2.9 1.8 3.1 1.2 –0.2 3.8 2.3 Q4
–2.4 –1.4 6.4 1.9 1.9 2.7 0.5 1.1 4.5 3.0 2023 Q1
0.7 –1.5 5.9 –0.2 –1.4 2.0 1.5 1.7 2.1 2.2 Q2
0.2 –1.8 7.1 –0.8 –1.9 1.7 1.2 1.3 1.4 2.6 Q3
0.0 ... ... –0.5 ... ... 1.2 2.2 2.1 2.1 Q4
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
20.1 8.4 0.1 5.0 11.2 3.5 10.3 10.2 7.5 6.4 2021
9.3 –1.3 2.8 2.6 6.9 –0.0 –4.0 1.2 3.0 1.2 2022
–5.2 p –5.8 p 5.8 p –7.4 p –1.3 –2.7 –0.6 p –5.3 p –0.7 ... 2023
10.8 –0.3 7.7 2.4 5.5 1.3 –1.6 1.7 4.6 –0.8 2022 Q3
–3.1 –3.3 10.0 1.3 2.8 –0.3 –8.4 –5.7 0.7 –0.1 Q4
–11.7 –4.4 13.6 –3.6 1.0 1.3 –3.5 –3.5 1.6 –0.6 2023 Q1
0.1 –6.9 6.6 –9.4 –0.4 –4.9 0.5 –4.2 –2.1 1.4 Q2
–5.5 –7.7 1.6 –8.0 –1.3 –4.9 –0.1 –9.3 –1.8 4.0 Q3
–3.2 p –4.1 p 2.5 p –8.7 p –4.4 –2.3 0.8 p –4.6 p –0.3 ... Q4
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
76.7 82.0 76.8 82.4 87.1 79.2 82.2 84.5 77.8 51.3 2021
77.8 80.8 64.7 83.7 87.7 81.9 83.3 84.9 78.7 58.2 2022
68.5 73.1 68.1 81.9 85.3 81.7 82.1 83.1 76.9 61.7 2023
77.2 79.8 63.6 82.6 85.7 81.6 83.0 83.9 77.2 60.6 2022 Q4
68.1 74.3 65.7 83.0 87.1 81.5 80.2 83.3 77.1 59.7 2023 Q1
69.0 75.5 53.3 82.5 86.3 83.5 84.0 83.9 76.3 60.9 Q2
68.1 72.0 69.4 81.3 84.6 80.9 83.0 82.9 76.2 62.7 Q3
68.6 70.5 84.1 80.9 83.3 80.9 81.0 82.4 77.8 63.3 Q4
70.7 74.8 75.6 78.8 84.1 81.0 80.1 80.6 77.2 65.4 2024 Q1
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
e 7.1 e 5.4 e 3.4 e 4.2 e 6.2 e 6.8 e 6.9 e 4.8 e 14.8 e 7.5 2021
e 5.9 e 4.6 e 2.9 e 3.6 e 4.8 e 6.2 e 6.2 e 4.0 e 13.0 e 6.8 2022
e 6.6 e 5.2 e 2.6 e 3.5 e 5.1 e 6.5 e 5.9 e 3.9 e 12.1 e 6.1 2023
6.7 5.3 2.5 3.6 5.4 6.3 5.9 3.8 11.9 6.0 2023 Aug.
6.9 5.5 2.5 3.7 5.5 6.6 5.9 3.9 11.9 5.9 Sep.
6.5 5.5 2.5 3.6 5.1 6.7 5.8 4.1 11.9 5.9 Oct.
6.5 5.7 2.4 3.5 4.9 6.6 5.8 4.2 11.8 5.9 Nov.
6.3 5.5 2.4 3.6 5.6 6.6 5.8 4.2 11.7 6.1 Dec.
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2024 Jan.
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
4.6 3.5 0.7 2.8 2.8 0.9 2.8 2.0 3.0 2.3 2021
18.9 8.2 6.1 11.6 8.6 8.1 12.1 9.3 8.3 8.1 2022
8.7 2.9 5.6 4.1 7.7 5.3 11.0 7.2 3.4 3.9 2023
6.4 3.5 5.0 3.4 7.5 5.3 9.6 6.1 2.4 3.1 2023 Aug.
4.1 3.4 4.9 –0.3 5.8 4.8 9.0 7.1 3.3 4.3 Sep.
3.1 2.1 4.2 –1.0 4.9 3.2 7.8 6.6 3.5 3.6 Oct.
2.3 2.1 3.9 1.4 4.9 2.2 6.9 4.5 3.3 2.4 Nov.
1.6 3.2 3.7 1.0 5.7 1.9 6.6 3.8 3.3 1.9 Dec.
e 1.0 3.0 e 3.6 3.1 e 4.3 2.5 e 4.3 3.4 e 3.5 e 2.0 2024 Jan.
General government financial balance 7
As a percentage of GDP
–1.1 0.6 –7.5 –2.2 –5.8 –2.9 –5.2 –4.6 –6.7 –1.9 2021
–0.7 –0.3 –5.7 –0.1 –3.5 –0.3 –2.0 –3.0 –4.7 2.4 2022
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2023
General government debt 7
As a percentage of GDP
46.2 24.6 52.2 54.7 83.0 134.9 58.9 79.6 120.3 114.9 2020
43.4 24.5 54.0 51.7 82.5 124.5 61.1 74.4 116.8 99.3 2021
38.1 24.7 52.3 50.1 78.4 112.4 57.8 72.3 111.6 85.6 2022
quarterly data seasonally adjusted. Data collection at the beginning of the quarter.
4 Monthly data seasonally adjusted.  5 Influenced by a temporary reduction of valueadded tax between July and December 2020.  6 Including Croatia from 2023 onwards.
7 According to Maastricht Treaty definition.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
8•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts *
a) Euro area 1
€ billion
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2022 May 107.2 65.1 –18.8 42.1 49.5 –51.3 40.8 92.2 –18.1 3.1 –3.2 –21.5 3.6
June 116.2 83.6 –8.8 32.6 33.5 99.4 –26.0 –125.4 22.2 –4.8 –0.4 1.6 25.8
July 29.8 58.6 –3.0 –28.8 –28.8 –27.9 63.5 91.3 5.3 –11.7 –0.4 –3.2 20.5
Aug. –10.7 26.1 –18.8 –36.8 –31.2 46.8 69.2 22.5 –15.2 –22.1 0.8 2.1 4.0
Sep. 86.6 83.1 –0.1 3.4 2.2 –52.8 –199.5 –146.7 14.7 –16.4 –0.4 4.0 27.5
Oct. –12.5 0.1 –6.1 –12.6 –9.7 – 0.8 169.5 170.3 –12.3 –14.7 0.1 11.2 –8.9
Nov. 93.0 84.0 31.0 9.0 14.3 14.8 –40.4 –55.1 33.9 1.7 0.2 34.0 –1.9
Dec. –121.5 –88.3 –0.9 –33.2 –41.3 1.1 –256.0 –257.0 47.5 10.0 0.1 0.7 36.8
2023 Jan. –10.1 –0.7 –14.4 –9.5 –4.2 11.6 126.7 115.1 30.0 –6.2 2.2 57.3 –23.3
Feb. 7.5 –13.3 3.2 20.9 29.8 8.3 0.1 –8.2 15.8 –1.3 1.6 10.3 5.3
Mar. 33.8 41.0 11.7 –7.2 –9.7 75.1 112.5 37.3 28.2 10.8 1.3 5.6 10.6
Apr. – 9.7 23.8 29.5 –33.5 –29.2 –20.7 –21.2 –0.6 10.5 9.3 1.4 3.9 –4.1
May – 0.0 45.7 33.3 –45.7 –50.0 4.4 22.2 17.8 37.6 –0.3 2.3 27.1 8.5
June 3.0 –11.3 –12.2 14.3 21.1 112.1 15.9 –96.1 43.8 1.2 2.8 26.8 13.1
July –46.7 6.7 5.4 –53.4 –53.0 33.3 106.7 73.4 32.7 0.9 2.9 17.1 11.8
Aug. –56.6 –67.4 –12.6 10.8 13.5 33.5 61.8 28.3 22.2 –2.4 4.0 11.1 9.4
Sep. 35.4 31.9 –1.2 3.5 2.6 61.9 –106.9 –168.8 43.3 15.7 5.0 11.0 11.6
Oct. –35.6 5.2 –11.1 –40.9 –40.4 57.5 51.8 –5.8 29.9 –9.3 4.7 26.9 7.6
Nov. 59.2 66.4 –0.7 –7.2 –3.2 53.7 46.9 –6.9 32.0 –6.8 5.6 39.4 –6.2
Dec. –55.4 –44.6 1.8 –10.8 –19.9 22.1 –102.8 –124.9 20.5 29.1 5.8 –10.8 –3.6
b) German contribution
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2022 May 39.1 28.5 3.5 10.6 13.5 –29.8 –0.9 28.9 2.0 –2.4 –0.1 2.0 2.5
June 32.6 25.5 –4.1 7.1 4.8 –22.4 –9.4 13.0 3.8 –3.1 –0.2 –3.8 10.8
July 18.2 30.6 10.6 –12.4 –13.4 42.7 4.3 –38.5 9.3 –2.0 –0.2 8.5 3.0
Aug. 26.0 39.4 –0.2 –13.4 –11.4 –50.3 6.7 57.1 3.0 –0.0 –0.1 0.8 2.3
Sep. 21.5 23.1 0.1 –1.7 –4.5 –27.4 1.6 29.0 4.1 –0.3 –0.0 –0.6 5.0
Oct. 12.8 10.5 –0.2 2.3 1.9 45.1 20.4 –24.7 –7.6 –1.2 0.2 3.2 –9.8
Nov. 25.4 26.2 1.4 –0.9 0.8 38.0 8.9 –29.1 9.8 1.9 0.2 7.1 0.6
Dec. –28.8 –19.6 –2.4 –9.3 –8.2 –37.1 –71.9 –34.8 –0.5 –3.7 0.4 –1.9 4.8
2023 Jan. 27.5 16.9 –0.2 10.7 8.9 63.0 29.8 –33.3 –14.3 2.7 1.0 3.1 –21.0
Feb. 9.2 8.3 –0.2 0.9 1.8 58.4 –2.0 –60.3 3.3 0.6 1.2 –2.1 3.5
Mar. 4.8 8.1 6.4 –3.4 –3.7 –12.4 10.5 23.0 15.5 6.0 1.6 4.4 3.5
Apr. – 3.7 13.0 1.2 –16.7 –20.2 62.7 –15.2 –77.9 5.0 2.0 1.5 –3.0 4.5
May 5.0 11.3 –1.3 –6.3 –4.7 9.6 16.5 6.9 16.9 2.7 2.2 6.1 5.8
June 1.5 –1.9 4.1 3.4 5.4 7.6 –6.6 –14.3 9.7 –0.9 2.7 –0.3 8.2
July 5.1 6.8 –1.1 –1.7 –4.7 34.0 8.3 –25.7 24.9 –0.3 3.0 10.2 12.0
Aug. – 6.8 –5.0 –6.1 –1.8 0.3 25.7 –5.3 –31.0 6.6 –2.7 2.7 0.2 6.4
Sep. – 8.2 1.7 0.8 –9.9 –13.3 – 0.1 –2.8 –2.7 21.1 0.1 2.9 11.6 6.4
Oct. – 2.0 0.1 –0.2 –2.1 –5.2 16.2 4.9 –11.3 11.8 –0.1 3.0 5.9 3.0
Nov. 12.2 13.1 –1.1 –0.8 1.8 13.7 –3.4 –17.1 10.6 3.7 3.4 1.0 2.4
Dec. –17.7 –10.9 2.4 –6.8 –5.1 –17.5 –10.4 7.1 8.6 2.9 2.5 1.7 1.4
* The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also the "Notes on the figures" in the "Explanatory notes" of the
Statistical Series Banking Statistics).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Excluding MFIs' portfolios.  3 Afterdeduction of inter-MFI participations.  4 Including the counterparts of monetary
liabilities of central governments.  5 Including the monetary liabilities of central
governments (Post Office, Treasury).  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.  7 Paper held
by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.  8 Less German MFIs' holdings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
9•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
a) Euro area 1
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2
Money stock M1
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments Total  4of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue Total Total TotalCurrency
in circu-
lationOvernight
deposits  5Deposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 years  5Deposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  5,6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  2,7,8Debt secur-
ities with
maturities
of up to
2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)
(net)  2,7 Period
–28.8 56.2 0.0 53.5 63.3 67.2 7.8 59.5 –15.9 11.9 4.7 –10.1 – 5.2 2022 May
69.8 65.7 0.0 73.0 79.3 52.1 6.6 45.5 24.1 3.1 –32.5 –1.0 11.2 June
–31.0 –138.3 0.0 159.4 126.5 74.6 8.6 66.0 46.7 5.1 23.7 –2.1 18.1 July
–80.3 68.2 0.0 79.0 71.5 20.2 –4.6 24.8 41.3 10.0 –22.6 6.8 7.4 Aug.
7.6 19.8 0.0 1.4 – 1.9 –101.1 –1.4 –99.6 99.7 – 0.6 –19.5 –8.4 21.7 Sep.
– 5.4 65.6 0.0 –57.6 –76.8 –157.2 –0.4 –156.9 85.4 – 5.0 4.4 36.7 –25.5 Oct.
–10.5 –1.7 0.0 69.8 20.6 –30.3 –3.5 –26.8 59.2 – 8.3 27.4 22.3 16.4 Nov.
–84.5 –63.4 0.0 3.2 13.1 –61.5 11.6 –73.1 59.8 14.8 –46.5 2.8 10.4 Dec.
–38.7 125.7 0.0 –133.4 –149.4 –231.6 –13.3 –218.4 76.0 6.2 35.1 6.6 – 8.0 2023 Jan.
20.3 21.9 0.0 –42.0 –63.4 –135.5 –3.5 –132.0 72.1 0.0 – 2.2 –6.4 29.8 Feb.
30.5 36.5 0.0 16.2 9.5 –104.3 3.9 –108.2 119.4 – 5.5 –25.7 20.6 9.4 Mar.
–27.1 –14.3 0.0 – 0.5 –17.7 –52.4 4.1 –56.5 46.1 –11.4 6.7 11.5 0.2 Apr.
–104.5 81.4 0.0 –30.3 –44.8 –94.3 1.7 –96.0 52.9 – 3.5 29.6 1.5 4.1 May
24.5 44.8 0.0 7.0 22.4 –60.9 3.1 –64.0 94.4 –11.2 –11.2 –6.1 – 3.5 June
–29.1 –2.5 0.0 0.4 –28.4 –91.1 3.0 –94.1 73.3 –10.6 4.1 10.6 – 0.6 July
–20.0 5.4 0.0 –43.2 –45.1 –101.9 –7.7 –94.2 81.1 –24.3 4.4 8.4 1.2 Aug.
35.1 –16.4 0.0 45.5 44.6 –11.6 –3.1 – 8.5 79.8 –23.6 – 5.8 –0.7 – 2.8 Sep.
–28.5 54.3 0.0 –43.0 –88.6 –169.1 –4.2 –165.0 102.2 –21.7 25.2 19.2 10.5 Oct.
–48.3 47.4 0.0 74.7 54.3 18.6 –2.7 21.3 48.4 –12.7 22.3 17.0 –11.7 Nov.
14.4 –213.1 0.0 160.3 160.4 66.3 14.0 52.4 75.4 18.6 –27.1 13.5 – 2.0 Dec.
b) German contribution
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10
of which: Components of the money stock
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments TotalIntra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9,11Currency
in circu-
lation TotalOvernight
depositsDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  7,8maturities
with
maturities
of up to 2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)(net)  7 Period
22.5 – 30.3 3.4 2.7 15.1 22.5 – 7.4 – 1.2 0.4 0.2 0.7 2022 May
14.9 – 37.5 3.7 0.5 29.0 19.6 7.5 – 1.6 0.6 – 0.0 2.9 June
– 38.2 55.3 – 5.3 9.1 34.6 5.7 23.6 – 1.7 4.3 0.1 2.6 July
– 24.1 – 71.1 – 11.7 12.5 67.9 56.8 13.9 – 2.4 – 1.8 – 0.1 1.4 Aug.
4.7 – 1.1 3.3 0.3 – 13.6 – 56.8 45.1 – 5.3 – 2.6 0.1 6.0 Sep.
5.1 65.9 0.1 0.1 – 5.4 – 32.1 36.8 – 3.3 – 0.2 0.1 – 6.7 Oct.
22.6 13.6 – 0.0 – 0.3 17.3 12.6 4.3 – 5.5 3.2 0.0 2.7 Nov.
– 16.3 – 24.6 2.1 2.4 – 24.6 – 37.6 19.0 – 4.1 – 2.0 0.1 0.0 Dec.
– 42.9 147.9 2.3 – 5.1 – 0.2 – 37.1 38.4 – 6.5 – 0.1 – 0.2 5.4 2023 Jan.
12.9 50.9 1.1 – 0.7 0.4 – 33.2 32.6 – 8.0 1.3 – 0.1 7.8 Feb.
27.1 – 34.8 2.3 0.9 – 15.5 – 45.7 31.8 – 10.4 – 0.2 0.3 8.7 Mar.
– 39.0 86.7 1.9 0.7 6.3 – 11.7 25.3 – 10.2 0.7 0.2 1.9 Apr.
– 11.8 2.8 2.6 0.9 6.7 – 6.2 18.4 – 10.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 5.1 May
– 9.8 8.4 1.7 1.1 0.8 – 29.2 36.7 – 10.0 – 0.3 – 0.0 3.6 June
– 6.4 20.0 1.6 1.3 0.7 – 21.8 31.5 – 10.3 0.3 0.3 0.8 July
7.4 – 1.5 2.9 – 1.9 6.4 – 21.1 30.4 – 11.2 1.1 0.1 7.1 Aug.
– 11.6 – 12.1 3.6 – 1.7 – 5.7 – 13.3 17.8 – 8.6 – 1.0 0.1 – 0.7 Sep.
– 2.4 2.9 1.5 – 0.5 1.9 – 31.2 38.8 – 9.4 0.8 – 0.1 3.0 Oct.
– 9.5 13.9 1.1 – 0.4 11.1 9.4 11.7 – 10.5 1.1 0.1 – 0.8 Nov.
7.8 – 61.7 2.4 2.8 10.2 – 7.4 26.2 – 5.0 – 1.2 0.1 – 2.5 Dec.
of paper issued by euro area MFIs.  9 Including national banknotes still in circulation.
10 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates should on no
account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are therefore not
comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.  11 Thedifference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank
and the amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the
Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
10•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
End of
monthTotal
assets or
liabilities Total Total LoansDebt
securities  2Shares and
other
equities Total LoansDebt
securities  3 
 
Claims
on non-
euro area
residentsOther
assets
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2021 Nov. 32,193.4 21,381.5 14,911.5 12,478.0 1,542.5 891.0 6,470.1 985.8 5,484.2 6,917.4 3,894.5
Dec. 31,777.4 21,384.4 14,917.2 12,462.9 1,567.3 887.0 6,467.2 988.5 5,478.8 6,738.7 3,654.2
2022 Jan. 32,417.1 21,571.9 15,046.8 12,609.0 1,553.2 884.6 6,525.0 999.2 5,525.9 6,914.5 3,930.7
Feb. 32,601.8 21,629.0 15,075.6 12,645.3 1,553.7 876.6 6,553.4 991.8 5,561.6 7,011.4 3,961.5
Mar. 32,937.3 21,737.1 15,176.1 12,722.0 1,587.4 866.7 6,561.1 1,001.4 5,559.7 6,996.1 4,204.1
Apr. 33,570.1 21,764.2 15,254.0 12,805.3 1,597.6 851.1 6,510.1 1,011.3 5,498.8 7,063.0 4,742.9
May 33,482.5 21,816.2 15,304.5 12,878.2 1,568.2 858.1 6,511.7 1,003.9 5,507.8 7,013.2 4,653.1
June 33,886.1 21,886.0 15,373.6 12,973.4 1,569.1 831.1 6,512.4 1,003.0 5,509.4 7,064.5 4,935.5
July 33,877.7 21,984.6 15,451.5 13,043.7 1,578.6 829.2 6,533.1 1,003.0 5,530.1 7,216.9 4,676.2
Aug. 34,342.9 21,872.4 15,459.5 13,080.1 1,553.7 825.7 6,413.0 996.9 5,416.1 7,301.6 5,168.9
Sep. 34,619.1 21,901.4 15,558.0 13,191.3 1,544.9 821.7 6,343.4 998.1 5,345.2 7,241.7 5,476.0
Oct. 34,551.1 21,891.6 15,553.1 13,190.6 1,533.0 829.6 6,338.5 995.2 5,343.3 7,336.9 5,322.6
Nov. 34,226.4 22,012.4 15,628.2 13,228.7 1,559.1 840.4 6,384.2 990.2 5,394.1 7,207.7 5,006.2
Dec. 33,866.4 21,792.5 15,515.4 13,124.3 1,555.4 835.7 6,277.1 998.9 5,278.2 6,873.4 5,200.5
2023 Jan. 33,828.2 21,883.3 15,553.1 13,171.7 1,545.6 835.8 6,330.2 1,000.3 5,330.0 6,982.9 4,962.0
Feb. 34,114.7 21,860.3 15,543.2 13,157.7 1,540.9 844.6 6,317.1 991.3 5,325.9 7,003.0 5,251.4
Mar. 33,955.0 21,921.0 15,575.3 13,175.7 1,552.2 847.4 6,345.7 995.3 5,350.3 7,101.4 4,932.6
Apr. 33,942.9 21,906.2 15,598.6 13,166.2 1,566.3 866.2 6,307.6 991.1 5,316.5 7,040.8 4,995.9
May 34,134.7 21,917.1 15,648.8 13,183.8 1,595.6 869.4 6,268.4 995.4 5,272.9 7,152.5 5,065.1
June 34,046.4 21,910.7 15,632.8 13,177.9 1,584.4 870.4 6,277.9 988.5 5,289.4 7,070.1 5,065.6
July 34,180.0 21,860.1 15,636.3 13,174.7 1,586.5 875.1 6,223.8 988.2 5,235.6 7,155.1 5,164.8
Aug. 34,233.2 21,805.6 15,568.7 13,119.1 1,576.8 872.8 6,237.0 986.1 5,250.9 7,253.3 5,174.2
Sep. 34,373.6 21,789.2 15,595.2 13,149.8 1,574.6 870.9 6,194.0 987.3 5,206.7 7,197.3 5,387.1
Oct. 34,338.8 21,745.8 15,591.2 13,160.4 1,554.9 876.0 6,154.6 984.1 5,170.5 7,266.5 5,326.5
Nov. 34,136.3 21,848.8 15,657.8 13,218.5 1,558.2 881.0 6,191.1 980.8 5,210.3 7,250.9 5,036.5
Dec. 33,747.8 21,846.2 15,613.6 13,165.1 1,551.8 896.7 6,232.6 990.7 5,241.9 7,142.6 4,758.9
German contribution (€ billion)
2021 Nov. 7,575.0 5,210.7 3,904.2 3,389.9 229.0 285.3 1,306.4 280.7 1,025.7 1,396.4 967.9
Dec. 7,475.8 5,212.1 3,914.7 3,393.2 237.0 284.5 1,297.4 278.0 1,019.5 1,355.9 907.8
2022 Jan. 7,787.0 5,243.9 3,944.7 3,422.9 235.8 286.0 1,299.2 279.9 1,019.3 1,433.6 1,109.5
Feb. 7,871.3 5,262.9 3,968.5 3,445.2 238.0 285.3 1,294.3 277.8 1,016.5 1,464.4 1,144.0
Mar. 7,997.7 5,280.7 3,990.2 3,464.4 240.6 285.2 1,290.6 278.6 1,012.0 1,447.5 1,269.5
Apr. 8,259.4 5,278.9 4,008.0 3,481.9 240.1 286.1 1,270.9 283.2 987.7 1,464.0 1,516.5
May 8,228.4 5,304.5 4,034.5 3,506.0 240.8 287.7 1,270.0 280.3 989.7 1,445.0 1,479.0
June 8,413.5 5,322.6 4,058.9 3,537.6 237.8 283.5 1,263.7 282.5 981.2 1,466.1 1,624.8
July 8,287.9 5,375.0 4,096.1 3,560.3 252.7 283.2 1,278.8 283.6 995.2 1,481.5 1,431.4
Aug. 8,546.0 5,364.5 4,132.0 3,600.0 249.1 282.9 1,232.5 281.5 951.0 1,492.4 1,689.0
Sep. 8,857.6 5,356.3 4,153.9 3,624.8 246.1 283.0 1,202.4 284.3 918.1 1,502.4 1,998.8
Oct. 8,826.7 5,366.0 4,163.6 3,634.6 245.9 283.1 1,202.4 284.8 917.5 1,509.0 1,951.8
Nov. 8,653.9 5,402.0 4,189.2 3,656.3 249.8 283.1 1,212.8 283.4 929.4 1,502.4 1,749.6
Dec. 8,626.1 5,345.2 4,165.8 3,636.7 245.9 283.2 1,179.4 283.2 896.1 1,417.3 1,863.7
2023 Jan. 8,561.4 5,377.1 4,178.3 3,652.7 245.9 279.7 1,198.8 285.0 913.9 1,443.8 1,740.5
Feb. 8,712.0 5,371.7 4,186.6 3,662.2 243.6 280.9 1,185.1 284.0 901.1 1,443.9 1,896.4
Mar. 8,573.5 5,388.1 4,193.6 3,661.9 252.1 279.6 1,194.5 284.2 910.3 1,457.2 1,728.2
Apr. 8,559.3 5,383.7 4,206.2 3,672.7 252.4 281.1 1,177.5 287.7 889.8 1,435.7 1,739.8
May 8,614.3 5,389.9 4,217.4 3,685.4 252.1 279.9 1,172.6 286.1 886.4 1,468.3 1,756.1
June 8,647.9 5,387.4 4,215.9 3,679.0 255.5 281.4 1,171.5 284.2 887.4 1,433.5 1,826.9
July 8,779.6 5,390.2 4,222.0 3,685.7 255.6 280.6 1,168.3 287.2 881.1 1,439.0 1,950.5
Aug. 8,776.6 5,383.7 4,215.6 3,685.5 249.4 280.6 1,168.1 285.0 883.0 1,442.2 1,950.7
Sep. 8,834.2 5,362.1 4,216.4 3,686.3 248.5 281.5 1,145.8 288.4 857.4 1,446.5 2,025.5
Oct. 8,844.5 5,360.6 4,215.5 3,685.5 247.9 282.1 1,145.1 291.6 853.5 1,461.4 2,022.6
Nov. 8,661.3 5,385.7 4,228.0 3,697.3 248.4 282.3 1,157.8 289.7 868.1 1,446.0 1,829.6
Dec. 8,492.2 5,386.2 4,217.6 3,682.5 247.9 287.2 1,168.6 288.2 880.5 1,432.5 1,673.6
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national
central banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Including money market paper ofenterprises.  3 Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by general
government.  4 Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p.12●). Excluding
MFIs` cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
11•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed
maturities ofAt agreed
notice of  6
Currency
in
circulation  4 Totalof which:
in euro  5 Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 monthsEnd of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
1,456.3 15,548.8 14,218.9 14,375.7 9,255.0 697.0 143.3 1,786.3 2,459.8 34.3 2021 Nov.
1,477.0 15,617.2 14,347.7 14,502.1 9,363.7 704.9 131.3 1,805.2 2,463.5 33.6 Dec.
1,477.9 15,694.2 14,328.1 14,526.9 9,353.8 706.6 135.3 1,820.2 2,479.3 31.8 2022 Jan.
1,487.0 15,787.1 14,373.8 14,561.7 9,412.4 688.4 134.3 1,807.7 2,487.3 31.6 Feb.
1,509.6 15,891.2 14,466.3 14,650.6 9,490.5 703.7 123.5 1,809.6 2,492.1 31.2 Mar.
1,520.7 15,934.3 14,522.8 14,712.1 9,555.8 705.4 123.5 1,802.0 2,494.3 31.0 Apr.
1,528.5 15,950.4 14,569.6 14,740.8 9,597.9 684.9 120.2 1,803.2 2,506.6 27.9 May
1,535.1 16,100.5 14,633.8 14,810.3 9,643.8 704.8 123.4 1,800.3 2,510.4 27.5 June
1,543.7 16,184.3 14,738.8 14,937.4 9,735.4 741.0 127.1 1,791.0 2,515.8 27.1 July
1,539.1 16,161.9 14,793.6 14,985.4 9,754.1 781.5 125.9 1,770.0 2,526.0 28.0 Aug.
1,537.7 16,199.4 14,785.5 15,036.4 9,688.0 913.3 125.5 1,756.3 2,525.7 27.6 Sep.
1,537.2 16,095.8 14,708.4 14,936.7 9,507.4 993.0 130.3 1,741.7 2,522.3 42.1 Oct.
1,533.7 16,084.9 14,723.0 14,917.6 9,442.3 1,042.9 134.6 1,741.1 2,514.5 42.3 Nov.
1,545.3 15,997.0 14,766.1 14,929.5 9,374.2 1,099.5 133.9 1,749.5 2,530.0 42.4 Dec.
1,533.4 15,876.9 14,667.6 14,844.9 9,208.5 1,163.7 146.1 1,746.4 2,532.0 48.2 2023 Jan.
1,529.9 15,843.6 14,625.2 14,773.2 9,064.0 1,223.7 157.3 1,746.5 2,531.8 49.9 Feb.
1,533.8 15,891.6 14,649.4 14,788.3 8,969.5 1,311.8 174.0 1,756.9 2,524.8 51.4 Mar.
1,537.9 15,848.9 14,650.0 14,784.7 8,918.3 1,346.2 187.9 1,765.7 2,513.9 52.8 Apr.
1,539.7 15,718.1 14,617.4 14,756.8 8,834.7 1,387.5 200.1 1,768.2 2,511.0 55.2 May
1,542.7 15,760.6 14,649.9 14,755.9 8,755.6 1,455.8 218.3 1,768.4 2,499.8 58.0 June
1,545.9 15,696.0 14,619.7 14,725.4 8,662.9 1,512.2 231.6 1,768.5 2,489.2 60.9 July
1,538.2 15,646.9 14,595.4 14,694.0 8,578.0 1,579.2 240.9 1,765.9 2,465.1 65.0 Aug.
1,535.1 15,756.4 14,654.9 14,766.9 8,569.2 1,647.6 255.2 1,783.1 2,441.7 70.1 Sep.
1,531.0 15,635.7 14,575.9 14,701.2 8,421.0 1,735.9 275.5 1,773.3 2,420.5 74.9 Oct.
1,528.2 15,630.5 14,627.5 14,741.3 8,426.1 1,775.2 286.0 1,765.5 2,408.0 80.6 Nov.
1,542.2 15,820.9 14,814.9 14,926.3 8,490.0 1,825.9 302.3 1,794.4 2,427.2 86.5 Dec.
German contribution (€ billion)
332.6 4,390.5 4,107.1 3,968.0 2,710.9 132.5 30.3 534.6 535.5 24.3 2021 Nov.
337.1 4,425.2 4,113.0 3,968.5 2,691.5 141.2 30.1 544.6 537.0 24.1 Dec.
337.9 4,418.1 4,139.2 4,006.8 2,737.3 135.4 29.7 543.6 537.4 23.4 2022 Jan.
340.1 4,444.1 4,161.0 4,017.1 2,752.3 132.4 29.4 542.3 537.7 23.1 Feb.
344.3 4,441.6 4,159.0 4,014.6 2,755.3 130.7 29.3 540.4 536.0 22.9 Mar.
346.7 4,445.6 4,158.1 4,019.8 2,754.8 140.0 29.4 537.7 535.1 22.7 Apr.
349.4 4,478.3 4,170.7 4,016.7 2,769.9 125.8 29.7 534.8 533.9 22.6 May
349.9 4,517.1 4,194.6 4,031.6 2,787.1 127.8 30.1 531.9 532.3 22.4 June
359.0 4,507.6 4,222.4 4,070.3 2,813.6 142.1 31.0 530.6 530.6 22.3 July
371.5 4,552.6 4,289.4 4,135.2 2,870.1 153.3 30.6 530.7 528.3 22.2 Aug.
371.8 4,541.5 4,267.4 4,135.1 2,834.9 193.7 30.9 530.3 523.0 22.2 Sep.
371.8 4,546.8 4,270.2 4,140.4 2,804.0 233.2 31.6 529.3 519.8 22.4 Oct.
371.5 4,578.7 4,283.7 4,146.3 2,806.0 240.1 32.1 531.0 514.4 22.6 Nov.
374.0 4,534.2 4,260.8 4,119.2 2,764.3 260.2 34.1 527.1 510.4 23.0 Dec.
368.9 4,489.3 4,257.7 4,126.0 2,749.9 286.6 36.9 529.6 499.1 24.0 2023 Jan.
368.1 4,496.6 4,250.9 4,106.5 2,706.5 314.2 39.1 530.3 491.2 25.2 Feb.
369.0 4,505.7 4,236.8 4,090.4 2,667.4 336.4 42.4 536.3 481.0 26.8 Mar.
369.8 4,473.0 4,248.0 4,104.2 2,660.3 360.2 46.1 538.3 471.0 28.3 Apr.
370.7 4,469.7 4,256.0 4,103.8 2,647.5 373.8 50.3 540.9 460.8 30.5 May
371.7 4,460.3 4,259.3 4,096.2 2,616.5 400.5 54.1 541.0 450.9 33.2 June
373.1 4,455.4 4,259.2 4,106.1 2,603.8 426.9 57.6 540.8 440.7 36.2 July
371.2 4,460.4 4,259.8 4,101.7 2,577.8 455.8 61.5 538.1 429.6 38.9 Aug.
369.4 4,448.9 4,258.5 4,104.2 2,568.6 468.0 66.2 538.5 421.1 41.8 Sep.
369.0 4,447.4 4,259.3 4,129.3 2,553.2 507.9 73.1 538.5 411.7 44.8 Oct.
368.6 4,454.3 4,281.0 4,149.1 2,561.8 515.9 79.5 542.6 401.2 48.3 Nov.
371.4 4,472.3 4,293.0 4,153.2 2,541.9 534.1 84.0 546.1 396.2 50.8 Dec.
euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by theBundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item "Intra-Eurosystem
liability/claim related to banknote issue" (see "Other liability items").  5 Excluding central
governments' deposits.  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
12•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) * (cont'd)
Liabilities (cont'd)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont'd)
General government 
 
Debt securities 
Other general governmentRepo transactions
with non-banks
in the euro area
 
With agreed maturities of 
At agreed notice of  2
End of
monthCentral
govern-
ment Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 months Totalof which:
Enterprises
and
householdsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  3 Totalof which:
Denom-
inated
in euro
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2021 Nov. 691.5 481.6 349.8 50.3 19.1 41.7 17.5 3.3 267.7 267.6 654.8 2,046.7 1,355.2
Dec. 646.7 468.4 337.4 49.7 19.4 41.1 17.6 3.2 234.3 233.1 647.5 2,019.7 1,346.8
2022 Jan. 710.2 457.0 307.4 67.4 19.6 41.2 17.6 3.8 291.8 291.6 621.2 2,049.2 1,351.4
Feb. 754.8 470.7 314.8 73.5 19.8 41.3 17.6 3.7 301.3 301.1 584.0 2,044.8 1,358.7
Mar. 769.1 471.5 305.4 82.5 20.5 42.4 17.3 3.4 283.8 283.6 583.8 2,026.7 1,358.6
Apr. 746.6 475.6 307.8 83.4 21.2 42.6 17.2 3.4 310.1 309.9 604.0 2,073.8 1,362.8
May 717.8 491.8 317.7 88.4 22.3 43.3 16.8 3.3 313.0 312.9 593.9 2,038.0 1,337.7
June 787.6 502.5 326.0 90.9 22.9 43.3 16.2 3.2 281.2 281.1 592.9 2,069.3 1,361.0
July 756.6 490.3 303.3 100.4 24.2 42.9 16.2 3.3 306.0 305.9 590.8 2,090.9 1,361.1
Aug. 676.3 500.1 309.7 104.6 24.0 42.5 16.1 3.2 283.8 283.7 597.5 2,113.5 1,375.1
Sep. 684.0 479.1 282.0 111.2 24.5 42.3 16.0 3.2 264.8 264.7 589.1 2,153.5 1,415.1
Oct. 678.6 480.5 287.5 109.2 24.3 41.5 14.7 3.2 268.8 268.8 625.8 2,130.5 1,416.5
Nov. 668.5 498.9 306.5 109.2 25.1 40.8 14.2 3.2 295.4 295.4 648.0 2,159.0 1,441.3
Dec. 583.8 483.7 296.2 103.6 27.2 40.2 13.5 3.0 248.3 248.3 650.9 2,166.2 1,474.6
2023 Jan. 551.0 480.9 283.3 113.0 27.5 40.6 12.8 3.7 284.0 284.0 657.6 2,204.9 1,510.2
Feb. 571.7 498.6 297.6 115.1 28.7 40.3 13.2 3.7 281.6 281.5 651.2 2,259.2 1,531.4
Mar. 602.5 500.8 288.7 125.7 28.4 39.6 14.7 3.7 255.3 255.2 671.9 2,257.0 1,551.1
Apr. 575.4 488.8 278.5 123.3 29.7 39.4 14.2 3.7 261.7 261.3 683.3 2,253.1 1,561.0
May 470.8 490.6 277.9 126.7 29.3 39.4 13.8 3.6 291.9 287.8 684.8 2,298.9 1,589.8
June 495.2 509.5 288.6 134.7 29.4 39.3 13.8 3.6 280.4 280.3 678.8 2,312.9 1,600.3
July 466.1 504.6 281.7 137.7 28.4 39.4 13.9 3.6 284.1 283.4 689.4 2,400.7 1,646.0
Aug. 446.0 506.9 283.2 138.6 28.0 39.6 13.8 3.5 288.9 288.9 698.0 2,420.1 1,656.1
Sep. 481.3 508.2 285.3 136.7 29.3 39.7 13.8 3.4 281.7 281.7 697.3 2,442.8 1,668.6
Oct. 452.8 481.7 266.6 131.0 28.5 39.2 13.1 3.3 306.8 306.6 716.7 2,504.2 1,704.7
Nov. 404.5 484.7 275.0 127.5 27.2 38.9 13.0 3.2 328.5 328.4 733.8 2,515.3 1,721.3
Dec. 418.9 475.7 265.6 127.7 28.4 38.6 12.4 3.1 301.3 301.2 746.2 2,493.6 1,708.8
German contribution (€ billion)
2021 Nov. 178.4 244.1 155.2 38.8 16.1 31.6 2.2 0.2 6.1 6.1 1.8 556.5 324.8
Dec. 206.2 250.5 161.9 39.1 16.4 30.7 2.3 0.2 5.8 4.8 2.1 547.6 316.3
2022 Jan. 168.1 243.3 139.1 54.6 16.5 30.7 2.2 0.2 4.7 4.7 2.2 562.8 325.1
Feb. 170.6 256.3 147.8 59.2 16.3 30.6 2.2 0.2 5.8 5.8 2.3 572.5 338.8
Mar. 170.6 256.4 137.6 68.8 17.0 30.7 2.2 0.1 6.3 6.3 2.4 581.5 354.8
Apr. 167.6 258.2 137.6 70.0 17.6 30.6 2.2 0.2 4.4 4.4 2.2 596.5 357.3
May 190.1 271.4 144.2 75.3 18.5 31.1 2.2 0.2 4.8 4.8 2.4 596.8 359.0
June 205.0 280.5 147.7 80.5 19.0 31.0 2.2 0.1 5.4 5.4 2.3 604.2 362.6
July 166.8 270.4 128.3 89.0 20.2 30.6 2.2 0.1 9.8 9.8 2.4 613.8 369.1
Aug. 142.7 274.6 129.4 92.2 20.4 30.4 2.2 0.1 8.0 8.0 2.3 625.7 384.5
Sep. 147.4 259.1 109.0 96.6 20.8 30.3 2.2 0.1 5.4 5.4 2.4 640.0 395.3
Oct. 152.5 253.9 108.1 93.1 20.5 30.1 2.1 0.1 5.2 5.2 2.5 633.9 398.1
Nov. 175.5 256.9 114.7 88.9 21.5 29.8 1.9 0.1 8.3 8.3 2.5 634.2 402.6
Dec. 159.2 255.8 117.3 83.2 23.9 29.6 1.8 0.1 6.3 6.3 2.6 631.2 409.3
2023 Jan. 116.4 246.9 99.4 92.2 23.8 29.8 1.6 0.1 6.1 6.1 2.4 639.6 417.9
Feb. 129.3 260.8 110.3 94.6 24.6 29.7 1.5 0.1 7.5 7.5 2.3 651.5 427.1
Mar. 156.4 258.8 102.2 101.4 24.1 29.6 1.4 0.1 7.2 7.2 2.6 658.0 440.3
Apr. 117.4 251.4 97.3 97.8 25.4 29.5 1.3 0.1 7.9 7.9 2.7 654.9 446.8
May 105.6 260.2 104.8 99.5 25.0 29.7 1.2 0.1 7.7 7.7 2.6 670.6 458.1
June 95.9 268.2 106.1 106.5 24.9 29.5 1.1 0.1 7.3 7.3 2.6 671.6 452.8
July 89.5 259.9 96.6 109.1 23.7 29.5 0.9 0.1 7.6 7.6 2.9 679.9 457.6
Aug. 96.8 261.9 100.9 107.1 23.3 29.6 0.9 0.1 8.7 8.7 3.0 688.8 469.0
Sep. 85.2 259.5 97.5 107.0 24.5 29.6 0.8 0.1 7.8 7.8 3.0 705.6 470.0
Oct. 82.8 235.3 81.6 99.3 24.1 29.4 0.7 0.1 8.5 8.5 2.9 713.0 476.3
Nov. 73.3 231.8 81.2 97.7 22.7 29.2 0.7 0.1 9.6 9.6 3.0 706.2 471.0
Dec. 81.1 238.0 84.9 99.7 23.9 28.6 0.7 0.1 8.4 8.4 3.2 699.6 476.8
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national central
banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 In Germany, only savings deposits.
3 Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding German MFIs'
portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area.  4 In Germany, bank debt
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper.5 Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued.  6 After deduction of inter-MFI
participations.  7 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.
8 Including DEM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on p. 10●). 9 For
the German contribution, the difference between the volume of euro banknotes

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
13•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  Memo item:
Other liability items  
 
issued (net)  3Monetary aggregates  7
(from 2002 German contribution
excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
up to
1 year  4over
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsLiabilities
to non-
euro area
residents  5Capital
and
reserves  6Excess
of
inter-MFI
liabilities Total  8of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem-
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12Monetary
capital
forma-
tion  13Monetary
liabilities
of central
govern-
ments
(Post
Office,
Treasury)  14 End of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
19.3 17.8 2,009.6 5,499.4 3,037.4 1.1 3,681.3 0.0 11,227.0 14,638.0 15,451.9 6,912.5 189.9 2021 Nov.
12.3 18.0 1,989.3 5,370.5 3,026.8 12.7 3,371.8 0.0 11,347.0 14,759.7 15,543.3 6,899.2 195.2 Dec.
22.0 18.5 2,008.7 5,541.7 3,001.7 22.9 3,716.5 0.0 11,311.7 14,761.1 15,546.0 6,907.4 196.2 2022 Jan.
33.4 5.7 2,005.7 5,629.5 2,994.0 16.8 3,757.2 0.0 11,387.7 14,830.4 15,585.4 6,883.9 195.2 Feb.
30.7 6.2 1,989.8 5,610.2 3,003.0 38.0 3,991.1 0.0 11,477.1 14,940.4 15,684.2 6,879.4 195.4 Mar.
39.0 16.2 2,018.6 5,747.7 2,979.2 – 2.7 4,402.9 0.0 11,557.8 15,026.8 15,811.5 6,876.8 197.5 Apr.
34.0 15.6 1,988.4 5,795.3 2,915.9 15.6 4,332.0 0.0 11,619.4 15,082.6 15,856.6 6,782.0 199.3 May
47.8 14.4 2,007.0 5,719.3 2,905.2 25.9 4,656.7 0.0 11,680.1 15,173.2 15,943.0 6,786.6 199.6 June
15.1 16.4 2,059.5 5,862.8 2,970.9 7.7 4,320.5 0.0 11,762.6 15,311.3 16,066.2 6,894.6 204.2 July
16.7 19.0 2,077.8 5,914.8 2,890.5 33.9 4,808.0 0.0 11,776.2 15,378.0 16,137.5 6,812.0 197.0 Aug.
34.9 19.5 2,099.1 5,898.7 2,845.0 16.1 5,114.8 0.0 11,681.6 15,419.9 16,180.2 6,773.5 196.2 Sep.
3.8 24.0 2,102.8 6,038.5 2,819.3 38.9 4,996.2 0.0 11,505.7 15,322.3 16,100.3 6,750.6 196.4 Oct.
23.7 22.8 2,112.5 5,881.3 2,857.3 66.8 4,700.0 0.0 11,460.4 15,323.0 16,151.7 6,797.1 200.1 Nov.
31.7 23.2 2,111.2 5,553.5 2,818.0 57.2 4,830.0 0.0 11,382.3 15,316.0 16,132.3 6,764.5 192.7 Dec.
17.6 27.8 2,159.4 5,636.6 2,861.7 84.9 4,688.2 0.0 11,195.5 15,211.9 16,043.4 6,860.0 191.6 2023 Jan.
47.0 30.4 2,181.8 5,670.8 2,810.8 81.4 4,986.3 0.0 11,062.6 15,153.5 16,009.1 6,832.9 192.2 Feb.
54.0 30.4 2,172.6 5,657.4 2,893.2 89.4 4,705.3 0.0 10,951.4 15,153.8 16,013.2 6,917.5 182.5 Mar.
50.2 32.9 2,170.0 5,633.4 2,885.5 114.2 4,725.0 0.0 10,894.5 15,132.6 16,007.4 6,917.1 182.9 Apr.
56.0 32.8 2,210.1 5,722.1 2,908.3 158.6 4,812.4 0.0 10,807.7 15,099.2 15,990.7 6,984.7 178.5 May
49.9 33.1 2,229.9 5,584.3 2,885.6 149.6 4,851.4 0.0 10,742.3 15,116.8 15,990.3 6,984.9 178.0 June
47.1 34.2 2,319.3 5,595.4 2,907.5 102.4 4,958.5 0.0 10,648.3 15,083.9 15,985.0 7,099.3 180.5 July
50.8 33.5 2,335.8 5,655.8 2,926.1 121.3 4,938.0 0.0 10,553.7 15,041.9 15,947.0 7,136.1 176.9 Aug.
45.1 36.4 2,361.3 5,541.0 2,886.8 111.5 5,120.8 0.0 10,547.1 15,094.1 16,001.0 7,144.5 180.3 Sep.
56.6 36.6 2,411.0 5,511.0 2,920.5 117.9 5,095.0 0.0 10,375.8 15,002.7 15,956.3 7,222.2 179.6 Oct.
45.8 35.9 2,433.6 5,445.5 2,950.4 163.8 4,840.3 0.0 10,387.9 15,046.9 16,020.5 7,272.2 180.8 Nov.
46.9 34.6 2,412.1 5,299.3 3,012.2 63.5 4,468.6 0.0 10,443.7 15,195.6 16,169.6 7,346.9 174.1 Dec.
German contribution (€ billion)
14.5 7.4 534.6 1,227.7 803.0 –1,154.8 1,744.2 504.5 2,866.1 3,621.4 3,651.2 1,928.3 0.0 2021 Nov.
16.1 7.5 524.0 1,305.6 796.1 –1,297.0 1,690.3 509.8 2,853.4 3,619.4 3,651.0 1,919.7 0.0 Dec.
13.6 7.7 541.5 1,271.1 778.4 –1,169.6 1,919.3 511.1 2,876.4 3,652.3 3,680.4 1,917.7 0.0 2022 Jan.
14.7 7.5 550.4 1,275.8 774.8 –1,172.9 1,969.0 514.2 2,900.0 3,677.2 3,707.4 1,921.4 0.0 Feb.
14.8 7.3 559.5 1,299.3 781.2 –1,190.8 2,076.2 520.0 2,892.9 3,677.0 3,707.8 1,934.7 0.0 Mar.
14.6 7.1 574.8 1,284.0 769.2 –1,168.1 2,325.6 523.3 2,892.4 3,686.8 3,715.1 1,935.2 0.0 Apr.
14.9 7.3 574.6 1,307.0 748.6 –1,199.2 2,289.8 526.8 2,914.0 3,699.5 3,728.9 1,911.8 0.0 May
18.7 6.6 578.9 1,317.0 743.1 –1,255.4 2,479.8 530.5 2,934.8 3,726.6 3,759.7 1,907.5 0.0 June
21.2 6.8 585.8 1,287.5 779.7 –1,189.6 2,276.7 525.2 2,941.9 3,757.1 3,797.3 1,949.2 0.0 July
21.8 7.6 596.2 1,349.3 739.6 –1,271.6 2,540.1 513.5 2,999.5 3,826.5 3,866.3 1,919.1 0.0 Aug.
27.5 8.1 604.3 1,385.2 711.9 –1,287.1 2,858.3 516.8 2,944.0 3,811.2 3,854.6 1,899.2 0.0 Sep.
19.1 9.7 605.0 1,355.1 693.8 –1,215.2 2,804.7 516.8 2,912.1 3,812.3 3,848.8 1,880.8 0.0 Oct.
20.8 11.2 602.2 1,310.2 714.6 –1,191.2 2,596.7 516.8 2,920.8 3,819.7 3,862.5 1,900.3 0.0 Nov.
20.2 11.7 599.3 1,265.7 690.1 –1,230.4 2,726.5 518.9 2,881.6 3,795.1 3,835.9 1,869.2 0.0 Dec.
24.0 13.1 602.4 1,226.5 689.1 –1,117.5 2,625.9 521.2 2,849.3 3,789.5 3,835.2 1,874.9 0.0 2023 Jan.
29.3 15.8 606.4 1,171.8 668.4 –1,073.2 2,787.2 522.2 2,816.8 3,782.0 3,836.8 1,860.1 0.0 Feb.
36.2 17.5 604.3 1,188.0 700.6 –1,129.7 2,641.2 524.5 2,769.6 3,756.4 3,819.8 1,897.7 0.0 Mar.
37.0 18.5 599.4 1,107.1 704.2 –1,028.5 2,637.8 526.4 2,757.6 3,759.4 3,825.5 1,899.8 0.0 Apr.
41.2 19.5 609.9 1,122.5 715.6 –1,036.9 2,662.4 529.0 2,752.3 3,762.8 3,833.9 1,926.7 0.0 May
44.6 19.2 607.9 1,099.9 709.8 –1,026.8 2,723.1 530.7 2,722.6 3,760.6 3,834.2 1,921.6 0.0 June
44.5 19.9 615.4 1,070.7 724.0 –996.4 2,835.7 532.2 2,700.4 3,759.3 3,834.2 1,946.1 0.0 July
51.0 20.6 617.2 1,044.4 734.2 –998.8 2,835.9 535.1 2,678.7 3,756.9 3,840.1 1,958.1 0.0 Aug.
48.5 22.6 634.5 1,048.4 722.8 –1,000.9 2,898.6 538.7 2,666.2 3,753.7 3,835.5 1,967.4 0.0 Sep.
49.7 24.4 639.0 1,035.9 735.9 –998.0 2,898.7 540.2 2,634.8 3,751.7 3,837.2 1,987.9 0.0 Oct.
49.6 23.6 633.1 1,012.0 753.5 –983.0 2,705.7 541.3 2,643.0 3,760.7 3,846.5 2,006.8 0.0 Nov.
45.7 24.8 629.0 1,016.5 778.6 –1,036.7 2,550.5 543.7 2,626.8 3,765.4 3,847.5 2,033.3 0.0 Dec.
actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2).  10 Overnight deposits (excluding central governments'
deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central governments'
overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the consolidated balance
sheet.  11 M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to two years and at agreednotice of up to three months (excluding central governments' deposits) and (for the
euro area) central governments' monetary liabilities with such maturities.  12 M2 plus
repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt securities
up to two years.  13 Deposits with agreed maturities of over two years and at agreed
notice of over three months, debt securities with maturities of over two years, capital
and reserves.  14 Non-existent in Germany.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
14•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
3. Banking systems liquidity position *
Stocks
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8
Eurosystem 2
2022 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 877.7 0.3 2,201.5 0.0 4,750.2 734.2 0.0 1,540.6 582.0 1,160.5 3,812.3 6,087.1
Mar. 887.2 0.3 2,201.3 0.0 4,842.0 746.0 0.0 1,550.6 642.6 1,091.1 3,900.8 6,197.3
Apr. 913.2 0.4 2,199.8 0.0 4,889.2 714.9 0.0 1,575.9 667.8 1,116.7 3,927.3 6,218.1
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 934.2 0.5 2,198.8 0.0 4,939.1 681.3 0.0 1,591.5 624.1 1,129.1 4,046.1 6,319.0
July 943.7 1.0 2,149.4 0.0 4,958.8 678.7 0.0 1,604.0 667.6 1,158.0 3,943.3 6,226.0
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 950.1 1.7 2,124.9 0.0 4,954.8 707.0 0.0 1,585.3 553.9 1,249.2 3,936.1 6,228.5
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 955.8 4.0 2,118.8 0.0 4,948.3 4,490.0 0.0 1,563.7 536.7 1,104.4 332.0 6,385.7
Dec. 960.4 1.9 1,947.1 0.0 4,946.1 4,521.5 0.0 1,560.8 492.5 1,066.9 213.8 6,296.2
2023 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 940.4 1.2 1,303.3 0.1 4,942.1 4,051.6 0.0 1,565.6 372.8 1,001.6 195.6 5,812.7
Mar. 916.8 0.9 1,233.3 0.0 4,939.0 4,103.0 0.0 1,553.9 380.2 861.8 191.1 5,848.0
Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 945.0 1.4 1,117.7 0.1 4,905.6 3,996.1 0.0 1,559.8 360.6 870.5 182.7 5,738.6
June 948.2 1.6 1,100.5 0.1 4,884.1 4,126.4 0.0 1,563.7 256.4 806.6 181.6 5,871.7
July . . . . . . . . . . . .
Aug. 927.8 10.9 682.0 0.1 4,853.0 3,704.4 0.0 1,567.0 254.4 770.5 177.4 5,448.9
Sep. 924.3 5.6 601.0 0.1 4,811.2 3,647.4 0.0 1,564.2 222.5 733.8 174.3 5,386.0
Oct. 931.2 8.1 515.4 0.1 4,767.9 3,577.4 0.0 1,554.7 222.7 693.3 174.6 5,306.7
Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec. 933.3 7.3 495.9 0.0 4,715.0 3,548.8 0.0 1,551.1 194.1 685.3 172.0 5,271.9
2024 Jan. 958.3 7.9 396.2 0.1 4,686.8 3,487.4 0.0 1,556.7 168.4 666.3 170.5 5,214.6
Deutsche Bundesbank
2022 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 212.4 0.3 421.7 0.0 1,034.0 204.5 0.0 374.6 205.6 – 165.1 1,048.8 1,627.9
Mar. 215.6 0.1 421.7 0.0 1,057.9 211.8 0.0 378.1 191.1 – 193.7 1,108.0 1,698.0
Apr. 223.9 0.1 420.8 0.0 1,068.7 197.7 0.0 384.9 196.7 – 189.1 1,123.3 1,705.9
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 230.4 0.1 420.2 0.0 1,087.4 189.9 0.0 388.0 196.9 – 183.1 1,147.4 1,725.3
July 231.7 0.3 409.1 0.0 1,084.3 185.8 0.0 390.3 214.9 – 175.4 1,109.7 1,685.8
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 232.1 0.3 403.6 0.0 1,076.8 228.5 0.0 379.5 157.9 – 161.8 1,108.8 1,716.8
Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nov. 231.7 0.8 400.5 0.0 1,071.5 1,304.0 0.0 379.0 127.2 – 231.4 125.9 1,808.8
Dec. 232.4 0.5 352.5 0.0 1,079.2 1,346.6 0.0 378.8 121.0 – 242.4 60.5 1,785.9
2023 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 229.8 0.4 231.9 0.1 1,076.8 1,234.6 0.0 377.2 77.8 – 205.4 54.8 1,666.7
Mar. 228.9 0.4 212.8 0.0 1,077.0 1,263.7 0.0 374.5 69.2 – 242.5 54.2 1,692.4
Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 239.2 0.7 200.2 0.1 1,066.1 1,228.0 0.0 375.7 73.4 – 221.1 50.1 1,653.9
June 241.7 0.7 198.9 0.1 1,056.8 1,256.3 0.0 377.2 54.7 – 241.8 52.0 1,685.4
July . . . . . . . . . . . .
Aug. 236.2 1.5 142.4 0.1 1,048.8 1,175.5 0.0 377.5 49.9 – 222.5 48.4 1,601.5
Sep. 234.5 0.8 131.2 0.1 1,041.3 1,177.8 0.0 377.3 40.1 – 235.4 48.0 1,603.1
Oct. 235.7 1.3 96.3 0.0 1,024.0 1,151.1 0.0 374.9 28.7 – 245.4 47.9 1,574.0
Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec. 236.8 0.7 89.2 0.0 1,016.7 1,171.3 0.0 373.5 18.9 – 267.7 47.3 1,592.1
2024 Jan. 243.9 0.9 69.5 0.1 1,005.8 1,127.3 0.0 379.3 19.8 – 253.3 47.0 1,553.6
Discrepancies may arise from rounding.  * The banking system's liquidity position is
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro area credit institutions with the
Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of the
Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  1 Figures are daily averages
for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following the
changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No figuresare available in such cases.  2 Source: ECB.  3 Includes liquidity provided under the
Eurosystem's asset purchase programmes.  4 From August 2009 includes liquidity
absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem's foreign exchange swap operations.  5 From
2002 euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national cen-
tral banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In accordance with the
accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a
share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
15•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Flows
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1
Eurosystem 2
. . . . . . . . . . . .2022 Jan.
+38.5 + 0.1 – 7.3 ± 0.0 +94.6 –10.8 ± 0.0 +19.2 –46.3 +194.8 –31.0 –22.6 Feb.
+ 9.5 ± 0.0 – 0.2 ± 0.0 +91.8 +11.8 ± 0.0 +10.0 +60.6 –69.4 +88.5 +110.2 Mar.
+26.0 + 0.1 – 1.5 ± 0.0 +47.2 –31.1 ± 0.0 +25.3 +25.2 +25.6 +26.5 +20.8 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
+21.0 + 0.1 – 1.0 ± 0.0 +49.9 –33.6 ± 0.0 +15.6 –43.7 +12.4 +118.8 +100.9 June
+ 9.5 + 0.5 –49.4 ± 0.0 +19.7 – 2.6 ± 0.0 +12.5 +43.5 +28.9 –102.8 –93.0 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 6.4 + 0.7 –24.5 ± 0.0 – 4.0 +28.3 ± 0.0 –18.7 –113.7 +91.2 – 7.2 + 2.5 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
+ 5.7 + 2.3 – 6.1 ± 0.0 – 6.5 +3,783.0 ± 0.0 –21.6 –17.2 –144.8 –3,604.1 +157.2 Nov.
+ 4.6 – 2.1 –171.7 ± 0.0 – 2.2 +31.5 ± 0.0 – 2.9 –44.2 –37.5 –118.2 –89.5 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2023 Jan.
–20.0 – 0.7 –643.8 + 0.1 – 4.0 –469.9 ± 0.0 + 4.8 –119.7 –65.3 –18.2 –483.5 Feb.
–23.6 – 0.3 –70.0 – 0.1 – 3.1 +51.4 ± 0.0 –11.7 +7.4 –139.8 – 4.5 +35.3 Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr.
+28.2 + 0.5 –115.6 + 0.1 –33.4 –106.9 ± 0.0 + 5.9 –19.6 + 8.7 – 8.4 –109.4 May
+ 3.2 + 0.2 –17.2 ± 0.0 –21.5 +130.3 ± 0.0 + 3.9 –104.2 –63.9 – 1.1 +133.1 June
. . . . . . . . . . . . July
–20.4 + 9.3 –418.5 ± 0.0 –31.1 –422.0 ± 0.0 + 3.3 –2.0 –36.1 – 4.2 –422.8 Aug.
– 3.5 – 5.3 –81.0 ± 0.0 –41.8 –57.0 ± 0.0 – 2.8 –31.9 –36.7 – 3.1 –62.9 Sep.
+ 6.9 + 2.5 –85.6 ± 0.0 –43.3 –70.0 ± 0.0 – 9.5 +0.2 –40.5 + 0.3 –79.3 Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov.
+ 2.1 – 0.8 –19.5 – 0.1 –52.9 –28.6 ± 0.0 – 3.6 –28.6 – 8.0 – 2.6 –34.8 Dec.
+25.0 + 0.6 –99.7 + 0.1 –28.2 –61.4 ± 0.0 + 5.6 –25.7 –19.0 – 1.5 –57.3 2024 Jan.
Deutsche Bundesbank
. . . . . . . . . . . .2022 Jan.
+11.1 + 0.2 –18.6 + 0.0 +18.2 – 2.0 ± 0.0 + 3.7 –14.7 +54.3 –28.3 –26.6 Feb.
+ 3.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.0 +23.9 + 7.4 ± 0.0 + 3.5 –14.5 –28.6 +59.2 +70.1 Mar.
+ 8.2 – 0.0 – 0.9 – 0.0 +10.8 –14.2 ± 0.0 + 6.8 +5.6 + 4.6 +15.2 + 7.9 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
+ 6.6 + 0.1 – 0.6 – 0.0 +18.7 – 7.7 ± 0.0 + 3.0 +0.2 + 6.0 +24.1 +19.4 June
+ 1.3 + 0.2 –11.1 – 0.0 – 3.1 – 4.1 ± 0.0 + 2.4 +18.0 + 7.7 –37.7 –39.5 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 0.4 + 0.0 – 5.5 – 0.0 – 7.5 +42.7 ± 0.0 –10.8 –57.1 +13.5 – 0.9 +31.0 Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Oct.
– 0.5 + 0.5 – 3.1 + 0.0 – 5.3 +1,075.5 ± 0.0 – 0.6 –30.7 –69.6 –982.9 +92.0 Nov.
+ 0.7 – 0.4 –48.0 + 0.0 + 7.7 +42.7 ± 0.0 – 0.1 –6.2 –11.0 –65.4 –22.9 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2023 Jan.
– 2.5 – 0.1 –120.6 + 0.1 – 2.4 –112.0 ± 0.0 – 1.6 –43.2 +37.0 – 5.6 –119.3 Feb.
– 1.0 + 0.0 –19.1 – 0.0 + 0.2 +29.1 ± 0.0 – 2.7 –8.6 –37.1 – 0.7 +25.7 Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr.
+10.3 + 0.2 –12.7 + 0.0 –11.0 –35.7 ± 0.0 + 1.2 +4.1 +21.4 – 4.1 –38.5 May
+ 2.6 + 0.1 – 1.3 + 0.0 – 9.3 +28.3 ± 0.0 + 1.4 –18.7 –20.7 + 1.9 +31.5 June
. . . . . . . . . . . . July
– 5.6 + 0.8 –56.5 – 0.0 – 8.0 –80.8 ± 0.0 + 0.4 –4.7 +19.3 – 3.5 –83.9 Aug.
– 1.7 – 0.7 –11.2 + 0.0 – 7.5 + 2.3 ± 0.0 – 0.2 –9.8 –13.0 – 0.4 + 1.6 Sep.
+ 1.2 + 0.5 –35.0 – 0.0 –17.3 –26.7 ± 0.0 – 2.4 –11.5 – 9.9 – 0.0 –29.1 Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov.
+ 1.1 – 0.6 – 7.1 – 0.0 – 7.3 +20.1 ± 0.0 – 1.4 –9.8 –22.3 – 0.7 +18.1 Dec.
+ 7.1 + 0.2 –19.7 + 0.0 –10.9 –44.0 ± 0.0 + 5.8 +0.9 +14.3 – 0.3 –38.5 2024 Jan.
allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is shown
under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the euro
banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB
has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other factors”. From 2003 eurobanknotes only.  6 Remaining items in the consolidated financial statement of the Euro-
system and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  7 Equal to the difference bet-
ween the sum of liquidity-pro viding factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors.
8 Calculated as the sum of the “Deposit facility”, “Banknotes in circulation” and “Credit
institutions' current account balances”.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
16•
III.Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets *
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currencyClaims on non-euro area
residents denominated in euro
As at
reporting
dateTotal
assets 
Gold and gold
receivables TotalReceivables
from the IMFBalances with
banks, security
investments,
external loans
and other
external
assetsClaims on
euro area
residents
denominated
in foreign
currency TotalBalances
with banks,
security
investments
and loansClaims
arising from
the credit
facility under
ERM II
Eurosystem 1
2023 July 14 7,205.5 609.3 497.7 229.0 268.6 13.7 14.1 14.1 –
21 7,186.9 609.3 496.6 228.9 267.6 14.3 14.2 14.2 –
28 7,189.3 609.3 497.8 229.0 268.8 12.9 14.2 14.2 –
Aug. 4 7,164.6 609.3 497.0 229.1 267.9 14.0 14.1 14.1 –
11 7,166.5 609.3 498.2 229.6 268.6 13.3 14.2 14.2 –
18 7,153.1 609.3 498.7 230.0 268.7 13.6 14.3 14.3 –
25 7,154.9 609.3 497.9 230.0 268.0 13.9 14.3 14.3 –
Sep. 1 7,168.2 609.3 498.7 231.3 267.4 14.2 14.1 14.1 –
8 7,153.1 609.3 498.3 231.3 267.1 14.3 14.0 14.0 –
15 7,135.7 609.3 497.2 231.3 265.9 14.7 14.2 14.2 –
22 7,142.0 609.3 497.3 231.3 266.0 14.5 14.5 14.5 –
29 7,066.5 613.3 502.4 234.2 268.2 15.4 14.2 14.2 –
Oct. 6 7,057.1 613.3 504.0 234.2 269.8 14.9 14.6 14.6 –
13 7,056.7 613.3 504.8 234.2 270.6 14.5 14.6 14.6 –
20 7,038.0 613.3 504.9 234.0 270.8 14.5 14.6 14.6 –
27 7,019.7 613.3 506.1 234.1 271.9 14.0 14.9 14.9 –
Nov. 3 7,001.6 613.3 506.4 234.2 272.1 13.6 14.8 14.8 –
10 6,998.9 613.3 506.2 234.3 272.0 14.5 15.2 15.2 –
17 7,001.1 613.3 507.1 234.0 273.0 14.5 15.0 15.0 –
24 6,995.8 613.3 507.4 234.1 273.3 14.2 15.2 15.2 –
Dec. 1 7,002.0 613.3 507.4 234.1 273.3 13.9 15.0 15.0 –
8 6,993.5 613.3 506.7 234.1 272.6 14.7 15.0 15.0 –
15 6,987.4 613.3 507.6 234.1 273.5 14.2 15.0 15.0 –
22 6,899.2 613.3 507.9 233.7 274.2 15.4 14.9 14.9 –
29 6,935.5 649.1 499.6 229.0 270.6 13.9 20.1 20.1 –
2024 Jan. 5 6,919.8 649.1 499.9 229.5 270.5 13.3 15.3 15.3 –
12 6,923.7 649.1 498.7 229.2 269.5 15.0 15.7 15.7 –
19 6,889.3 649.1 498.8 229.1 269.6 14.5 15.2 15.2 –
26 6,887.6 649.1 499.1 229.6 269.5 14.9 15.8 15.8 –
Feb. 2 6,865.4 649.1 499.5 230.0 269.5 14.7 16.0 16.0 –
Deutsche Bundesbank
2023 July 14 2,551.9 189.0 91.7 57.9 33.9 0.0 – – –
21 2,550.2 189.0 91.7 57.9 33.8 0.0 – – –
28 2,547.0 189.0 91.7 57.9 33.8 0.0 – – –
Aug. 4 2,562.8 189.0 91.9 58.0 33.9 0.0 – – –
11 2,552.0 189.0 91.6 58.0 33.7 0.0 – – –
18 2,559.4 189.0 92.2 58.2 34.0 0.0 – – –
25 2,550.9 189.0 92.0 58.2 33.7 0.0 – – –
Sep. 1 2,577.3 189.0 91.9 58.2 33.6 0.0 – – –
8 2,561.7 189.0 91.9 58.2 33.7 0.0 – – –
15 2,551.1 189.0 91.7 58.2 33.5 0.0 – – –
22 2,528.2 189.0 91.8 58.2 33.6 0.0 – – –
29 2,510.1 190.2 92.3 58.9 33.3 0.0 – – –
Oct. 6 2,506.6 190.2 92.3 58.9 33.4 0.0 – – –
13 2,504.5 190.2 92.5 58.9 33.6 0.0 – – –
20 2,509.3 190.2 92.7 58.9 33.8 0.0 – – –
27 2,512.0 190.2 93.1 58.9 34.2 0.0 – – –
Nov. 3 2,535.6 190.2 93.3 59.0 34.3 0.0 – – –
10 2,532.7 190.2 93.5 59.0 34.4 0.0 – – –
17 2,513.2 190.2 93.3 58.9 34.4 0.0 – – –
24 2,522.1 190.2 93.3 58.9 34.4 0.0 – – –
Dec. 1 2,511.5 190.2 93.2 58.9 34.3 0.0 – – –
8 2,536.1 190.2 93.2 58.9 34.3 0.0 – – –
15 2,512.8 190.2 92.9 58.9 34.0 0.0 – – –
22 2,490.5 190.2 92.6 58.7 33.9 0.0 – – –
29 2,536.2 201.3 90.9 57.5 33.4 0.0 5.2 5.2 –
2024 Jan. 5 2,501.5 201.3 90.4 58.0 32.3 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
12 2,513.7 201.3 90.0 57.7 32.3 0.0 0.6 0.6 –
19 2,483.0 201.3 90.3 57.7 32.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
26 2,497.5 201.3 90.5 57.8 32.8 0.0 0.5 0.5 –
Feb. 2 2,512.4 201.3 90.9 57.9 33.0 0.0 0.7 0.7 –
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet itemsfor foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the end of
the quarter.  1 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
17•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euroSecurities of euro area residents
in euro
TotalMain re-
financing
opera-
tionsLonger-
term re-
financing
opera-
tionsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsStructural
reverse
opera-
tionsMarginal
lending
facility 
 
 
 
Credits
related
to margin
callsOther
claims on
euro area
credit
institutions
denomi-
nated in
euro TotalSecurities
held for
monetary
policy
purposesOther
securitiesGeneral
government
debt deno-
minated in
euroOther
assetsAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 1
609.9 11.8 598.0 – – 0.1 – 33.6 5,050.5 4,860.6 189.9 21.0 355.8 2023 July 14
608.1 10.0 598.0 – – 0.1 – 38.2 5,031.5 4,841.8 189.8 21.0 353.7 21
611.7 11.0 600.4 – – 0.2 – 33.9 5,027.2 4,837.3 189.8 21.0 361.4 28
607.8 7.4 600.4 – – 0.0 – 35.6 5,011.7 4,822.4 189.4 21.0 354.1 Aug. 4
606.1 5.7 600.4 – – 0.0 – 29.3 5,014.2 4,824.7 189.4 21.0 361.1 11
605.9 5.2 600.4 – – 0.3 – 30.2 4,999.3 4,808.8 190.5 21.0 360.8 18
606.4 5.9 600.4 – – 0.0 – 28.3 4,999.8 4,808.3 191.6 21.0 364.0 25
608.9 7.0 601.9 – – 0.1 – 31.1 5,001.9 4,809.5 192.4 21.0 369.1 Sep. 1
605.8 3.9 601.9 – – 0.0 – 24.5 5,003.0 4,810.2 192.7 21.0 362.9 8
605.9 4.0 601.9 – – 0.0 – 27.2 4,986.1 4,793.2 192.9 21.0 360.2 15
605.9 4.0 601.9 – – 0.0 – 33.4 4,984.5 4,789.2 195.3 21.0 361.6 22
509.8 11.4 498.5 – – – – 35.2 4,976.4 4,779.8 196.6 21.0 378.7 29
506.3 7.8 498.5 – – 0.0 – 23.4 4,977.6 4,777.8 199.8 21.0 382.0 Oct. 6
506.0 7.5 498.5 – – 0.0 – 26.9 4,974.1 4,772.9 201.2 21.0 381.6 13
506.2 7.7 498.5 – – 0.0 – 24.6 4,957.0 4,754.0 203.0 21.0 382.0 20
506.6 10.5 495.8 – – 0.3 – 24.5 4,936.6 4,734.6 202.0 21.0 382.7 27
504.0 8.1 495.8 – – – – 25.8 4,925.3 4,724.6 200.7 21.0 377.5 Nov. 3
502.7 6.9 495.8 – – – – 25.8 4,922.2 4,721.7 200.5 21.0 378.0 10
503.0 7.1 495.8 – – 0.0 – 24.7 4,921.9 4,720.9 201.1 21.0 380.6 17
503.2 7.3 495.8 – – 0.0 – 23.9 4,917.6 4,715.7 201.9 21.0 380.1 24
504.4 8.5 496.0 – – – – 31.6 4,911.2 4,709.4 201.7 21.0 384.3 Dec. 1
502.5 6.5 496.0 – – – – 25.5 4,913.6 4,710.5 203.1 21.0 381.3 8
502.7 6.5 496.0 – – 0.3 – 27.0 4,905.7 4,701.4 204.3 21.0 380.9 15
404.8 8.4 396.2 – – 0.2 – 33.5 4,904.0 4,701.3 202.7 21.0 384.5 22
410.3 14.1 396.2 – – 0.0 – 28.7 4,899.0 4,694.3 204.6 20.9 393.9 29
403.6 7.4 396.2 – – – – 32.0 4,895.2 4,691.0 204.2 20.9 390.5 2024 Jan. 5
402.2 6.0 396.2 – – – – 28.5 4,897.7 4,693.3 204.4 20.9 395.9 12
402.1 5.9 396.2 – – – – 25.0 4,877.2 4,671.2 206.0 20.9 386.5 19
401.8 5.6 396.2 – – – – 24.0 4,880.9 4,673.4 207.5 20.9 381.1 26
403.3 6.4 396.9 – – – – 30.4 4,866.7 4,661.9 204.9 20.9 364.8 Feb. 2
Deutsche Bundesbank
132.5 1.3 131.1 – – 0.1 – 9.8 1,048.9 1,048.9 – 4.4 1,075.6 2023 July 14
132.5 1.3 131.1 – – 0.1 – 11.4 1,047.8 1,047.8 – 4.4 1,073.4 21
133.2 1.7 131.2 – – 0.2 – 12.3 1,048.6 1,048.6 – 4.4 1,067.8 28
132.1 0.9 131.2 – – 0.0 – 11.5 1,049.2 1,049.2 – 4.4 1,084.6 Aug. 4
131.9 0.7 131.2 – – 0.0 – 12.0 1,050.2 1,050.2 – 4.4 1,072.9 11
131.8 0.2 131.2 – – 0.3 – 13.0 1,039.8 1,039.8 – 4.4 1,089.1 18
132.2 1.0 131.2 – – 0.0 – 10.0 1,038.8 1,038.8 – 4.4 1,084.5 25
132.5 1.3 131.2 – – 0.1 – 12.0 1,039.5 1,039.5 – 4.4 1,107.9 Sep. 1
131.9 0.6 131.2 – – 0.0 – 10.2 1,039.7 1,039.7 – 4.4 1,094.5 8
131.8 0.6 131.2 – – 0.0 – 9.7 1,030.6 1,030.6 – 4.4 1,093.8 15
131.9 0.7 131.2 – – 0.0 – 11.3 1,027.8 1,027.8 – 4.4 1,071.9 22
91.3 2.0 89.3 – – – – 9.6 1,027.0 1,027.0 – 4.4 1,095.4 29
90.3 1.1 89.3 – – – – 9.6 1,027.2 1,027.2 – 4.4 1,092.5 Oct. 6
90.3 1.0 89.3 – – 0.0 – 11.6 1,020.4 1,020.4 – 4.4 1,095.0 13
90.4 1.1 89.3 – – 0.0 – 10.9 1,019.4 1,019.4 – 4.4 1,101.2 20
91.4 1.8 89.2 – – 0.3 – 11.6 1,019.8 1,019.8 – 4.4 1,101.4 27
90.2 0.9 89.2 – – 0.0 – 11.5 1,020.6 1,020.6 – 4.4 1,125.3 Nov. 3
89.9 0.7 89.2 – – – – 12.6 1,018.9 1,018.9 – 4.4 1,123.1 10
90.2 0.9 89.2 – – 0.0 – 11.5 1,018.3 1,018.3 – 4.4 1,105.3 17
90.1 0.9 89.2 – – 0.0 – 11.8 1,015.7 1,015.7 – 4.4 1,116.5 24
90.0 0.9 89.1 – – – – 12.0 1,015.6 1,015.6 – 4.4 1,106.0 Dec. 1
89.5 0.3 89.1 – – – – 12.2 1,016.3 1,016.3 – 4.4 1,130.2 8
89.6 0.2 89.1 – – 0.3 – 10.4 1,010.5 1,010.5 – 4.4 1,114.8 15
70.4 0.7 69.5 – – 0.2 – 10.4 1,010.2 1,010.2 – 4.4 1,112.2 22
72.3 2.7 69.5 – – – – 5.8 1,009.1 1,009.1 – 4.4 1,147.2 29
69.9 0.4 69.5 – – – – 9.6 1,005.6 1,005.6 – 4.4 1,119.9 2024 Jan. 5
69.7 0.1 69.5 – – – – 12.1 1,006.1 1,006.1 – 4.4 1,129.5 12
70.1 0.6 69.5 – – – – 8.7 1,001.6 1,001.6 – 4.4 1,106.5 19
70.2 0.7 69.5 – – – – 8.6 1,002.2 1,002.2 – 4.4 1,119.6 26
70.1 0.8 69.3 – – – – 9.2 1,002.2 1,002.2 – 4.4 1,133.5 Feb. 2

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
18•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
2. Liabilities *
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to
monetary policy operations denominated in euroLiabilities to
other euro area residents
denominated in euro
As at
reporting
date 
Total
liabilitiesBanknotes
in circu-
lation  1 TotalCurrent
accounts
(covering
the
minimum
reserve
system)Deposit
facilityFixed-
term
depositsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsDeposits
related to
margin
callsOther
liabilities
to euro 
area credit
institutions
deno-
minated
in euroDebt
certifi-
cates
issued TotalGeneral
govern-
mentOther
liabilities
Eurosystem 3
2023 July 14 7,205.5 1,568.8 3,827.8 156.4 3,671.4 – – 0.0 32.3 – 338.9 250.6 88.2
21 7,186.9 1,567.7 3,791.3 157.3 3,634.0 – – 0.0 33.9 – 346.8 260.8 86.0
28 7,189.3 1,569.0 3,770.2 185.1 3,585.1 – – 0.0 32.8 – 370.5 281.6 88.9
Aug. 4 7,164.6 1,569.4 3,818.4 168.0 3,650.3 – – 0.0 30.9 – 305.9 219.0 86.9
11 7,166.5 1,569.6 3,821.8 177.2 3,644.6 – – 0.0 33.2 – 311.2 224.6 86.5
18 7,153.1 1,567.0 3,812.6 149.5 3,663.0 – – 0.0 33.7 – 305.5 219.0 86.5
25 7,154.9 1,563.1 3,815.8 148.6 3,667.1 – – 0.0 35.1 – 313.6 227.8 85.8
Sep. 1 7,168.2 1,562.3 3,821.1 163.6 3,657.5 – – 0.0 37.2 – 311.9 220.8 91.1
8 7,153.1 1,560.5 3,841.8 159.4 3,682.4 – – 0.0 37.5 – 299.0 214.2 84.8
15 7,135.7 1,558.7 3,813.2 223.3 3,589.9 – – 0.0 33.7 – 316.1 232.1 84.1
22 7,142.0 1,556.2 3,823.4 162.6 3,660.8 – – 0.0 38.7 – 310.3 228.0 82.4
29 7,066.5 1,557.6 3,640.8 173.8 3,467.0 – – 0.0 46.2 – 350.0 262.1 87.9
Oct. 6 7,057.1 1,556.9 3,756.3 153.2 3,603.1 – – 0.0 33.1 – 289.1 211.5 77.7
13 7,056.7 1,554.6 3,763.4 161.0 3,602.3 – – 0.0 35.6 – 305.2 224.1 81.1
20 7,038.0 1,551.7 3,749.9 162.5 3,587.3 – – 0.0 35.5 – 293.0 217.3 75.7
27 7,019.7 1,552.4 3,733.7 200.4 3,533.3 – – 0.0 35.9 – 285.6 205.2 80.4
Nov. 3 7,001.6 1,553.2 3,716.4 167.1 3,549.3 – – 0.0 37.6 – 281.4 200.5 80.9
10 6,998.9 1,550.0 3,715.8 154.9 3,560.9 – – 0.0 37.8 – 284.9 206.1 78.8
17 7,001.1 1,547.9 3,726.7 162.6 3,564.1 – – 0.0 37.5 – 280.2 202.0 78.2
24 6,995.8 1,547.2 3,706.3 157.0 3,549.3 – – 0.0 37.4 – 289.4 210.3 79.1
Dec. 1 7,002.0 1,549.8 3,722.2 163.0 3,559.2 – – 0.0 36.1 – 267.1 184.2 83.0
8 6,993.5 1,554.3 3,732.4 165.6 3,566.8 – – 0.0 36.9 – 257.2 173.1 84.1
15 6,987.4 1,556.6 3,725.2 191.5 3,533.7 – – 0.0 36.2 – 259.8 177.5 82.3
22 6,899.2 1,565.1 3,649.6 204.0 3,445.6 – – 0.0 40.1 – 232.5 145.0 87.5
29 6,935.5 1,567.7 3,508.9 174.0 3,334.8 – – 0.0 58.9 – 303.9 212.8 91.1
2024 Jan. 5 6,919.8 1,561.6 3,679.9 139.7 3,540.1 – – 0.0 40.0 – 239.9 158.8 81.1
12 6,923.7 1,553.6 3,703.5 136.3 3,567.2 – – 0.0 37.5 – 239.2 161.6 77.6
19 6,889.3 1,548.8 3,666.6 162.3 3,504.3 – – 0.0 35.7 – 259.9 181.5 78.5
26 6,887.6 1,545.5 3,678.6 174.2 3,504.3 – – 0.0 36.3 – 257.0 178.9 78.0
Feb. 2 6,865.4 1,545.2 3,676.9 167.8 3,509.1 – – 0.0 33.8 – 239.2 162.3 76.9
Deutsche Bundesbank
2023 July 14 2,551.9 378.0 1,201.0 41.8 1,159.2 – – 0.0 7.7 – 78.2 57.6 20.6
21 2,550.2 377.5 1,209.1 42.2 1,166.9 – – 0.0 9.1 – 65.8 45.0 20.8
28 2,547.0 378.6 1,193.6 59.1 1,134.4 – – 0.0 8.4 – 74.7 54.0 20.7
Aug. 4 2,562.8 378.1 1,227.7 51.2 1,176.5 – – 0.0 6.8 – 57.1 37.9 19.2
11 2,552.0 378.2 1,221.6 63.1 1,158.4 – – 0.0 8.4 – 55.9 35.8 20.1
18 2,559.4 377.9 1,222.5 35.6 1,186.9 – – 0.0 9.4 – 60.4 40.3 20.0
25 2,550.9 377.7 1,223.6 34.7 1,188.8 – – 0.0 9.3 – 56.8 38.4 18.5
Sep. 1 2,577.3 375.8 1,244.3 42.7 1,201.6 – – 0.0 10.9 – 59.0 38.7 20.3
8 2,561.7 376.6 1,235.5 41.5 1,194.0 – – 0.0 9.4 – 56.2 37.6 18.5
15 2,551.1 376.8 1,208.2 66.8 1,141.4 – – 0.0 7.4 – 70.2 52.5 17.8
22 2,528.2 376.4 1,206.6 44.8 1,161.8 – – 0.0 9.8 – 56.6 38.4 18.3
29 2,510.1 374.6 1,149.6 48.6 1,101.0 – – 0.0 11.7 – 53.8 35.1 18.7
Oct. 6 2,506.6 375.0 1,201.7 40.2 1,161.5 – – 0.0 7.8 – 39.0 24.7 14.3
13 2,504.5 374.6 1,193.8 40.4 1,153.4 – – 0.0 8.0 – 45.5 29.3 16.1
20 2,509.3 374.1 1,210.3 40.7 1,169.6 – – 0.0 7.5 – 36.1 21.0 15.1
27 2,512.0 374.6 1,205.4 57.0 1,148.4 – – 0.0 7.0 – 39.7 24.0 15.7
Nov. 3 2,535.6 373.5 1,230.9 47.9 1,183.0 – – 0.0 6.8 – 36.7 20.5 16.2
10 2,532.7 372.9 1,219.5 41.0 1,178.5 – – 0.0 8.4 – 37.8 22.4 15.5
17 2,513.2 372.7 1,205.5 40.4 1,165.0 – – 0.0 6.9 – 34.2 18.9 15.3
24 2,522.1 372.4 1,221.3 39.9 1,181.4 – – 0.0 7.6 – 28.8 13.3 15.5
Dec. 1 2,511.5 372.8 1,207.9 42.8 1,165.0 – – 0.0 7.3 – 31.5 15.5 16.1
8 2,536.1 374.6 1,232.8 42.5 1,190.3 – – 0.0 7.3 – 30.7 15.8 14.9
15 2,512.8 376.2 1,191.5 59.6 1,131.9 – – 0.0 5.7 – 45.3 31.1 14.2
22 2,490.5 378.9 1,173.8 54.2 1,119.6 – – 0.0 6.6 – 35.1 18.5 16.6
29 2,536.2 377.0 1,109.9 53.0 1,056.8 – – 0.0 14.5 – 44.4 26.0 18.5
2024 Jan. 5 2,501.5 381.5 1,189.7 38.5 1,151.2 – – 0.0 8.9 – 37.4 22.5 14.9
12 2,513.7 379.6 1,200.0 37.1 1,162.9 – – 0.0 8.9 – 30.4 17.2 13.2
19 2,483.0 378.8 1,174.7 39.0 1,135.7 – – 0.0 6.6 – 29.6 17.4 12.2
26 2,497.5 377.8 1,182.8 51.5 1,131.2 – – 0.0 7.2 – 28.5 15.6 12.9
Feb. 2 2,512.4 379.1 1,206.7 46.2 1,160.5 – – 0.0 5.5 – 29.5 17.2 12.4
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet items
for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at marketrates at the end of the quarrter.  1 In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen
by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of
the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthy basis. The
counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an "Intra-Eurosystem liability related to

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
19•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Liabilities
to non-euro
area residents
denominated
in euroLiabilities
to euro area
residents
in foreign
currency TotalDeposits,
balances
and other
liabilitiesLiabilities
arising
from the
credit facility
under ERM IICounterpart
of special
drawing
rights allocated
by the IMFOther
liabilities  2Intra-
Eurosystem
liability
related to
euro
banknote
issue  1 
 
 
 
 
Revaluation
accountsCapital
and
reservesAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 3
250.5 13.6 6.0 6.0 – 178.4 272.1 – 597.0 120.2 2023 July 14
257.1 13.5 6.7 6.7 – 178.4 274.2 – 597.0 120.2 21
255.9 13.8 4.4 4.4 – 178.4 277.1 – 597.0 120.2 28
253.5 13.7 3.8 3.8 – 178.4 273.4 – 597.0 120.2 Aug. 4
245.7 13.9 4.5 4.5 – 178.4 271.0 – 597.0 120.2 11
245.9 14.3 6.3 6.3 – 178.4 272.4 – 597.0 120.2 18
238.9 14.5 5.5 5.5 – 178.4 272.7 – 597.0 120.2 25
242.4 14.3 4.3 4.3 – 178.4 279.1 – 597.0 120.2 Sep. 1
233.9 13.9 3.1 3.1 – 178.4 267.7 – 597.0 120.2 8
234.2 13.8 3.5 3.5 – 178.4 266.8 – 597.0 120.2 15
232.7 13.9 4.3 4.3 – 178.4 266.9 – 597.0 120.2 22
273.5 13.6 3.9 3.9 – 180.7 275.7 – 604.2 120.2 29
228.3 14.5 3.2 3.2 – 180.7 270.4 – 604.2 120.2 Oct. 6
208.3 14.8 3.3 3.3 – 180.7 266.4 – 604.2 120.2 13
215.5 15.5 4.1 4.1 – 180.7 267.7 – 604.2 120.2 20
222.3 15.7 4.2 4.2 – 180.7 264.7 – 604.2 120.2 27
226.5 15.6 3.9 3.9 – 180.7 262.0 – 604.2 120.2 Nov. 3
228.2 16.1 4.2 4.2 – 180.7 256.7 – 604.2 120.2 10
227.1 16.2 3.9 3.9 – 180.7 256.6 – 604.2 120.2 17
233.8 16.1 4.8 4.8 – 180.7 255.7 – 604.2 120.2 24
237.3 15.9 4.8 4.8 – 180.7 263.8 – 604.2 120.2 Dec. 1
233.2 16.6 4.3 4.3 – 180.7 253.4 – 604.2 120.2 8
232.7 17.3 4.2 4.2 – 180.7 250.2 – 604.2 120.2 15
229.7 18.0 4.5 4.5 – 180.7 254.6 – 604.2 120.2 22
281.9 16.4 4.5 4.5 – 177.1 260.9 – 635.1 120.2 29
193.7 17.6 3.5 3.5 – 177.1 251.1 – 635.1 120.3 2024 Jan. 5
186.3 17.9 3.4 3.4 – 177.1 249.8 – 635.0 120.3 12
186.5 17.2 2.3 2.3 – 177.1 239.9 – 635.0 120.3 19
185.9 17.0 1.8 1.8 – 177.1 233.3 – 634.8 120.3 26
192.5 17.3 1.7 1.7 – 177.1 226.7 – 634.9 120.1 Feb. 2
Deutsche Bundesbank
83.7 0.2 – – – 46.0 35.4 530.7 185.5 5.5 2023 July 14
85.2 0.1 – – – 46.0 35.5 530.7 185.5 5.5 21
88.1 0.1 – – – 46.0 35.7 530.7 185.5 5.5 28
88.4 0.1 0.2 0.2 – 46.0 35.0 532.2 185.5 5.5 Aug. 4
83.3 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.0 35.1 532.2 185.5 5.5 11
82.7 0.1 0.5 0.5 – 46.0 36.5 532.2 185.5 5.5 18
76.6 0.1 0.5 0.5 – 46.0 37.0 532.2 185.5 5.5 25
77.9 0.1 0.2 0.2 – 46.0 36.7 535.1 185.5 5.5 Sep. 1
74.9 0.1 0.2 0.2 – 46.0 36.5 535.1 185.5 5.5 8
79.4 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 46.0 36.8 535.1 185.5 5.5 15
69.5 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.0 36.9 535.1 185.5 5.5 22
104.8 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 37.3 538.7 187.4 5.5 29
67.6 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 37.1 538.7 187.4 5.5 Oct. 6
67.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 37.2 538.7 187.4 5.5 13
65.7 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 37.2 538.7 187.4 5.5 20
69.6 0.1 0.2 0.2 – 46.6 37.1 538.7 187.4 5.5 27
71.3 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 36.5 540.2 187.4 5.5 Nov. 3
77.5 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 36.6 540.2 187.4 5.5 10
77.4 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 36.7 540.2 187.4 5.5 17
75.4 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 36.8 540.2 187.4 5.5 24
74.3 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 36.7 541.3 187.4 5.5 Dec. 1
72.8 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 36.9 541.3 187.4 5.5 8
76.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 37.1 541.3 187.4 5.5 15
77.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.6 37.2 541.3 187.4 5.5 22
161.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 45.7 37.3 543.7 197.1 5.5 29
75.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 45.7 23.2 536.7 197.1 5.5 2024 Jan. 5
71.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 45.7 38.5 536.7 197.1 5.5 12
69.4 0.0 0.1 0.1 – 45.7 38.6 536.7 197.1 5.5 19
71.7 0.0 0.1 0.1 – 45.7 39.1 541.9 197.1 5.5 26
68.7 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 45.7 38.3 536.2 197.1 5.5 Feb. 2
euro banknote issue". The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on an monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the eurobanknotes allocated to the NCB according to the aforementioned accounting
procedure and the value of euro banknotes put into circulation is also disclosed as an
"Intra-Eurosystem claim/liability related to banknote issue".  2 For the Deutsche Bundes-
bank: including DEM banknotes still in circulation.  3 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
20•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Assets
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the 
to banks in the home country to banks in other Member States to non-banks in the home country 
Enterprises and house- 
holds   
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1Cash
in hand Total Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Total Total Loans
End of year or month 
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2018 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2019 8,311.0 43.4 2,230.1 1,759.8 1,493.5 266.3 470.4 327.6 142.8 4,020.1 3,584.9 3,168.7 2,864.9
2020 8,943.3 47.5 2,622.7 2,177.9 1,913.5 264.4 444.8 307.1 137.7 4,179.6 3,709.8 3,297.0 2,993.1
2021 9,172.2 49.7 2,789.6 2,333.0 2,069.6 263.4 456.6 324.4 132.2 4,350.4 3,860.4 3,468.8 3,147.6
2022 10,517.9 20.0 2,935.2 2,432.2 2,169.2 263.0 502.9 359.6 143.3 4,584.6 4,079.3 3,702.9 3,365.4
2023 10,321.8 18.7 2,884.6 2,349.8 2,081.9 267.9 534.8 374.7 160.1 4,652.5 4,110.5 3,730.0 3,396.0
2022 Mar. 9,962.9 50.0 3,066.9 2,546.2 2,281.9 264.3 520.7 387.1 133.7 4,426.8 3,916.4 3,526.5 3,204.1
Apr. 10,268.8 51.0 3,112.2 2,578.0 2,313.7 264.2 534.2 400.5 133.8 4,434.6 3,929.2 3,546.3 3,223.8
May 10,258.0 50.0 3,122.7 2,592.6 2,326.2 266.4 530.1 397.8 132.3 4,460.3 3,949.5 3,567.4 3,244.7
June 10,428.9 51.8 3,096.5 2,570.9 2,306.2 264.7 525.6 394.1 131.5 4,494.4 3,969.5 3,589.6 3,268.8
July 10,267.9 42.3 3,086.0 2,557.4 2,291.5 266.0 528.6 396.8 131.8 4,528.3 4,008.2 3,627.9 3,293.6
Aug. 10,627.2 23.6 3,166.4 2,625.3 2,359.2 266.1 541.1 409.1 132.0 4,555.4 4,039.2 3,664.4 3,331.1
Sep. 11,063.0 20.7 3,268.0 2,714.2 2,442.2 272.0 553.7 419.7 134.0 4,579.6 4,057.2 3,685.0 3,351.1
Oct. 11,036.0 20.0 3,259.8 2,696.8 2,424.2 272.6 563.0 416.3 146.7 4,591.1 4,077.8 3,699.7 3,365.9
Nov. 10,762.4 19.1 3,180.1 2,630.6 2,360.1 270.5 549.5 403.2 146.2 4,610.5 4,089.4 3,715.1 3,379.3
Dec. 10,517.9 20.0 2,935.2 2,432.2 2,169.2 263.0 502.9 359.6 143.3 4,584.6 4,079.3 3,702.9 3,365.4
2023 Jan. 10,585.0 18.2 3,085.7 2,550.5 2,288.2 262.3 535.1 383.8 151.4 4,600.1 4,080.1 3,706.1 3,372.3
Feb. 10,760.9 18.0 3,085.7 2,541.4 2,274.9 266.5 544.3 390.6 153.8 4,614.2 4,094.2 3,714.7 3,381.3
Mar. 10,553.8 17.9 3,041.3 2,497.8 2,229.3 268.4 543.5 391.2 152.3 4,620.6 4,094.7 3,718.2 3,386.0
Apr. 10,564.3 18.9 3,047.7 2,507.0 2,237.3 269.7 540.7 384.5 156.2 4,630.5 4,096.8 3,721.7 3,390.4
May 10,653.7 18.2 3,091.2 2,550.3 2,279.7 270.6 541.0 383.4 157.5 4,642.2 4,103.4 3,733.0 3,400.9
June 10,577.7 17.7 2,967.0 2,434.5 2,166.3 268.2 532.5 371.5 161.0 4,646.7 4,108.0 3,734.5 3,397.1
July 10,743.2 17.2 3,002.4 2,456.4 2,188.8 267.6 546.0 384.8 161.2 4,651.1 4,114.5 3,738.2 3,402.0
Aug. 10,735.3 17.5 2,994.8 2,455.6 2,187.1 268.4 539.2 377.9 161.4 4,649.4 4,111.7 3,733.9 3,400.6
Sep. 10,737.5 18.0 2,916.4 2,371.6 2,106.3 265.3 544.8 382.8 162.0 4,649.8 4,113.1 3,735.7 3,401.7
Oct. 10,797.9 17.5 2,980.6 2,430.9 2,165.6 265.3 549.7 387.7 162.1 4,653.7 4,116.8 3,736.3 3,401.6
Nov. 10,610.8 16.9 2,987.1 2,438.4 2,168.4 270.0 548.7 386.5 162.2 4,666.3 4,123.1 3,740.9 3,406.9
Dec. 10,321.8 18.7 2,884.6 2,349.8 2,081.9 267.9 534.8 374.7 160.1 4,652.5 4,110.5 3,730.0 3,396.0
Changes 3
2015 –191.4 0.3 –18.2 –12.1 66.1 –78.2 – 6.1 6.6 –12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 –16.8 –58.1 – 49.2 – 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.0
2017 8.0 6.1 135.9 165.0 182.6 –17.6 –29.1 – 19.6 – 9.5 51.3 63.5 114.8 101.1
2018 101.8 8.5 –29.2 –49.7 –53.4 3.7 20.6 13.0 7.6 78.7 71.9 118.1 127.8
2019 483.4 2.8 20.7 – 3.8 – 2.3 – 1.5 24.5 16.9 7.5 161.8 130.5 148.2 140.9
2020 769.5 4.1 505.4 524.2 512.6 11.6 –18.8 – 16.2 – 2.6 161.0 130.0 132.3 132.2
2021 207.2 2.2 161.3 155.6 156.4 – 0.8 5.7 11.7 – 5.9 175.7 154.6 173.7 155.9
2022 1,170.5 –29.7 149.5 103.7 100.5 3.2 45.8 33.1 12.7 242.4 223.1 237.5 220.6
2023 –137.6 – 1.3 –41.9 –76.2 –86.2 10.0 34.3 16.8 17.5 84.5 44.8 40.6 41.5
2022 Apr. 283.1 1.0 41.6 30.8 30.8 0.0 10.8 10.6 0.2 7.5 12.8 19.7 19.4
May 1.1 – 1.0 12.4 15.3 12.8 2.5 – 2.9 – 1.5 – 1.3 27.4 21.2 21.6 21.3
June 178.6 1.7 –28.2 –22.2 –20.6 – 1.6 – 6.0 – 5.3 – 0.6 32.9 19.9 22.0 23.7
July –177.9 – 9.5 –12.8 –14.2 –15.0 0.8 1.4 1.4 0.0 29.7 36.0 36.0 22.6
Aug. 359.0 –18.7 83.5 71.7 70.7 1.0 11.8 11.3 0.4 28.1 31.4 36.5 37.5
Sep. 428.4 – 2.9 99.8 88.6 82.4 6.2 11.3 9.0 2.3 27.0 17.2 19.5 18.7
Oct. –19.3 – 0.7 – 6.7 –17.0 –17.7 0.6 10.3 – 2.4 12.7 12.4 21.1 15.3 15.5
Nov. –245.9 – 0.9 –75.9 –65.0 –63.0 – 2.0 –10.9 – 10.5 – 0.5 21.4 13.0 17.1 15.1
Dec. –225.1 0.9 –240.0 –196.2 –189.2 – 7.1 –43.8 – 41.2 – 2.6 –24.0 – 8.4 – 9.9 –11.6
2023 Jan. 87.5 – 1.8 155.0 122.2 119.3 2.8 32.8 24.0 8.9 22.8 6.5 8.1 8.0
Feb. 167.0 – 0.2 – 0.8 – 9.1 –13.4 4.3 8.3 5.8 2.5 13.4 13.6 7.9 8.3
Mar. –195.2 – 0.1 –42.8 –43.2 –45.0 1.8 0.4 1.9 – 1.5 8.2 2.0 5.0 6.2
Apr. 16.7 1.0 7.7 9.8 8.1 1.7 – 2.1 – 6.0 3.9 11.0 3.0 4.2 5.1
May 91.9 – 0.7 41.9 42.2 41.3 0.9 – 0.2 – 1.6 1.3 12.3 6.8 11.5 10.6
June –65.9 – 0.5 –121.0 –113.5 –112.5 – 1.1 – 7.5 – 11.0 3.5 4.7 5.5 2.5 – 1.7
July 170.6 – 0.5 34.6 22.2 22.7 – 0.6 12.4 12.2 0.2 6.0 7.6 4.7 5.8
Aug. –15.1 0.3 – 7.6 – 1.1 – 1.9 0.8 – 6.5 – 6.6 0.1 – 0.5 – 2.4 – 3.9 – 1.0
Sep. 1.6 0.6 –78.5 –83.9 –80.8 – 3.1 5.3 4.7 0.7 1.6 2.3 2.7 2.0
Oct. 68.3 – 0.5 64.7 59.5 59.5 0.0 5.1 5.1 0.1 5.1 4.6 1.5 0.9
Nov. –174.8 – 0.6 8.2 7.9 3.2 4.7 0.3 0.3 0.0 13.7 7.3 6.4 7.2
Dec. –290.2 1.8 –103.3 –89.1 –86.8 – 2.3 –14.2 – 12.0 – 2.2 –13.7 –12.1 –10.0 – 9.9
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.  1 See
footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
21•
IV. Banks
euro area
to non-banks in other Member States 
Claims on non-euro area
residents
 
  
General governmentEnterprises and
households 
General government
 
Securities Total Loans 
Securities  2Total Totalof which:
Loans Total Loans 
Securities Totalof which:
LoansOther
assets  1 Period
End of year or month
276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016
308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 2017
297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2 2018
303.8 416.2 254.7 161.6 435.2 312.6 199.0 122.6 29.4 93.2 1,035.8 777.5 981.5 2019
303.9 412.8 252.3 160.5 469.8 327.5 222.2 142.3 29.7 112.7 1,003.2 751.2 1,090.3 2020
321.2 391.6 245.1 146.5 490.1 362.7 244.0 127.4 28.4 99.0 1,094.2 853.3 888.3 2021
337.5 376.4 248.0 128.4 505.3 384.9 270.2 120.4 30.8 89.6 1,137.2 882.9 1,841.0 2022
334.0 380.5 255.3 125.2 542.0 411.1 283.5 130.9 28.4 102.5 1,134.8 876.4 1,631.2 2023
322.3 390.0 245.2 144.8 510.4 379.5 259.4 130.9 29.0 101.9 1,169.2 921.9 1,249.9 2022 Mar.
322.5 382.9 246.5 136.4 505.4 378.8 257.8 126.7 32.2 94.4 1,174.5 926.0 1,496.5 Apr.
322.7 382.1 244.5 137.7 510.9 383.7 260.7 127.1 31.4 95.7 1,166.1 917.3 1,458.8 May
320.9 379.9 244.9 135.0 524.9 388.1 268.4 136.8 33.2 103.6 1,182.4 925.1 1,603.8 June
334.3 380.3 245.8 134.5 520.2 383.8 266.0 136.4 33.4 103.0 1,199.9 941.5 1,411.5 July
333.3 374.8 243.4 131.4 516.2 387.1 268.6 129.1 33.7 95.4 1,211.7 952.6 1,670.0 Aug.
333.9 372.2 244.5 127.7 522.4 390.5 273.1 132.0 35.4 96.6 1,220.9 961.0 1,973.8 Sep.
333.8 378.1 246.0 132.1 513.3 385.7 268.4 127.6 34.4 93.2 1,234.2 975.7 1,930.8 Oct.
335.9 374.2 246.3 127.9 521.1 394.0 276.5 127.1 32.7 94.4 1,224.6 963.4 1,728.1 Nov.
337.5 376.4 248.0 128.4 505.3 384.9 270.2 120.4 30.8 89.6 1,137.2 882.9 1,841.0 Dec.
333.8 374.0 250.3 123.7 520.1 393.5 280.2 126.6 30.2 96.4 1,161.9 904.0 1,719.2 2023 Jan.
333.5 379.5 248.2 131.3 520.0 393.3 279.2 126.8 31.3 95.4 1,167.6 904.4 1,875.3 Feb.
332.2 376.5 248.9 127.6 526.0 397.5 275.7 128.4 30.9 97.5 1,168.5 902.6 1,705.4 Mar.
331.2 375.1 250.9 124.2 533.7 405.8 280.9 128.0 32.3 95.7 1,149.9 883.9 1,717.3 Apr.
332.1 370.5 249.8 120.7 538.7 407.7 284.6 131.0 31.9 99.1 1,177.7 912.0 1,724.4 May
337.4 373.4 248.7 124.7 538.7 403.1 279.6 135.6 31.0 104.5 1,150.6 886.7 1,795.7 June
336.2 376.4 252.1 124.3 536.6 407.3 282.8 129.3 30.7 98.7 1,156.3 895.0 1,916.3 July
333.3 377.9 249.5 128.4 537.7 404.5 282.9 133.2 31.1 102.1 1,157.7 899.2 1,915.9 Aug.
334.1 377.4 252.0 125.4 536.7 404.7 282.5 132.0 32.0 100.0 1,163.8 902.7 1,989.5 Sep.
334.7 380.5 255.1 125.4 537.0 405.6 282.9 131.4 32.0 99.4 1,165.8 909.5 1,980.1 Oct.
334.0 382.2 254.4 127.8 543.2 412.1 288.2 131.1 30.9 100.2 1,153.0 895.0 1,787.6 Nov.
334.0 380.5 255.3 125.2 542.0 411.1 283.5 130.9 28.4 102.5 1,134.8 876.4 1,631.2 Dec.
Changes 3
11.5 – 3.9 – 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 – 3.7 – 1.0 – 2.8 –88.3 –101.0 –150.1 2015
7.8 –35.4 –12.1 –23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 – 4.2 – 0.9 – 3.3 51.4 55.0 –51.4 2016
13.7 –51.3 –22.8 –28.5 –12.2 – 3.4 4.0 – 8.7 0.1 – 8.9 –12.3 – 6.7 –173.1 2017
– 9.8 –46.2 –19.1 –27.0 6.8 18.2 18.6 –11.4 – 1.5 – 9.9 29.0 18.9 14.8 2018
7.3 –17.7 – 8.6 – 9.1 31.3 29.5 26.9 1.7 0.0 1.7 –32.1 –33.3 330.3 2019
0.2 – 2.4 – 1.7 – 0.7 31.0 30.6 20.9 0.3 – 0.4 0.7 – 9.7 – 8.2 108.8 2020
17.8 –19.1 – 6.1 –13.1 21.1 35.5 22.6 –14.3 – 1.1 –13.2 71.7 84.9 –203.7 2021
16.9 –14.4 1.9 –16.3 19.3 20.7 24.4 – 1.4 2.6 – 3.9 15.0 – 0.8 793.3 2022
– 0.9 4.2 6.5 – 2.3 39.7 28.0 14.9 11.7 – 2.4 14.0 39.3 31.1 –218.2 2023
0.2 – 6.8 1.4 – 8.2 – 5.3 – 1.6 – 2.7 – 3.7 3.2 – 6.9 –13.8 –14.2 246.6 2022 Apr.
0.3 – 0.4 – 2.0 1.6 6.2 5.4 3.3 0.8 – 0.8 1.7 – 1.0 – 2.0 –36.6 May
– 1.7 – 2.1 0.4 – 2.5 13.0 3.0 6.1 10.0 1.9 8.1 –10.0 –18.2 182.3 June
13.4 0.0 0.9 – 0.8 – 6.3 – 5.2 – 2.9 – 1.1 0.1 – 1.3 7.8 8.0 –193.2 July
– 1.0 – 5.1 – 2.3 – 2.8 – 3.3 3.4 2.5 – 6.7 0.4 – 7.0 7.2 6.5 258.9 Aug.
0.8 – 2.4 1.1 – 3.5 9.9 3.3 4.0 6.6 1.7 4.8 0.7 0.1 303.7 Sep.
– 0.3 5.9 1.4 4.4 – 8.7 – 4.4 – 4.6 – 4.3 – 1.0 – 3.3 19.7 20.4 –44.0 Oct.
2.0 – 4.1 0.0 – 4.1 8.4 9.2 9.6 – 0.8 – 1.7 0.9 8.8 4.8 –199.3 Nov.
1.8 1.5 0.9 0.6 –15.6 – 9.3 – 6.2 – 6.4 – 1.9 – 4.5 –75.0 –69.5 112.9 Dec.
0.1 – 1.6 2.3 – 3.9 16.3 9.4 10.0 6.9 – 0.6 7.5 33.4 27.8 –121.8 2023 Jan.
– 0.4 5.6 – 2.0 7.7 – 0.2 – 0.7 – 1.4 0.5 1.1 – 0.7 – 1.7 – 6.6 156.4 Feb.
– 1.2 – 3.0 0.8 – 3.7 6.1 4.6 – 3.0 1.5 – 0.4 1.9 9.6 6.5 –170.1 Mar.
– 1.0 – 1.2 2.1 – 3.3 8.0 8.5 5.4 – 0.5 1.4 – 1.9 –14.9 –15.4 11.9 Apr.
0.9 – 4.7 – 1.2 – 3.5 5.4 2.1 3.9 3.4 – 0.4 3.7 28.3 28.1 10.1 May
4.2 3.0 – 1.1 4.1 – 0.9 – 5.5 – 5.9 4.6 – 0.9 5.5 – 9.4 – 8.3 60.3 June
– 1.2 3.0 3.4 – 0.4 – 1.7 4.4 3.4 – 6.1 – 0.3 – 5.7 10.3 12.6 120.4 July
– 2.8 1.5 – 2.6 4.1 1.9 – 1.9 1.0 3.8 0.5 3.4 – 5.1 – 1.9 – 2.2 Aug.
0.7 – 0.3 2.6 – 2.9 – 0.7 0.4 – 0.3 – 1.1 0.9 – 2.0 6.6 3.7 71.3 Sep.
0.7 3.0 3.1 – 0.0 0.5 1.1 0.5 – 0.5 0.0 – 0.6 3.9 8.3 – 5.0 Oct.
– 0.8 0.9 – 1.5 2.4 6.4 6.7 5.8 – 0.3 – 1.2 0.9 – 3.0 – 5.3 –193.1 Nov.
– 0.1 – 2.1 0.7 – 2.8 – 1.6 – 1.1 – 4.6 – 0.5 – 2.5 2.0 –18.6 –18.5 –156.5 Dec.
of equalisation claims.  3 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures
(see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
22•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Liabilities
€ billion
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area   Deposits of banks (MFIs)
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks 
of banks
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1 Totalin the
home
countryin other
Member
States Total Total 
Overnight Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Total 
Overnight
End of year or month 
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2018 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2019 8,311.0 1,242.8 1,010.4 232.4 3,778.1 3,649.8 2,230.9 843.7 261.7 575.1 540.5 116.3 54.6
2020 8,943.3 1,493.2 1,237.0 256.3 4,021.6 3,836.7 2,508.4 767.8 227.1 560.5 533.2 135.1 57.0
2021 9,172.2 1,628.6 1,338.6 289.9 4,129.9 3,931.8 2,649.3 721.3 203.9 561.2 537.1 153.8 70.7
2022 10,517.9 1,618.6 1,231.6 387.0 4,343.5 4,093.8 2,712.1 848.6 353.7 533.2 510.2 180.5 84.1
2023 10,321.8 1,487.6 1,098.0 389.6 4,421.2 4,176.3 2,531.9 1,198.6 694.4 445.9 395.3 186.5 76.1
2022 Mar. 9,962.9 1,737.5 1,367.8 369.8 4,212.3 3,990.1 2,690.3 740.9 226.7 559.0 536.1 177.7 99.4
Apr. 10,268.8 1,766.8 1,384.4 382.3 4,223.7 4,003.6 2,700.1 745.6 234.6 557.9 535.2 175.5 93.4
May 10,258.0 1,765.9 1,393.7 372.2 4,236.1 4,013.3 2,718.3 738.4 229.4 556.5 534.0 176.2 97.1
June 10,428.9 1,744.4 1,384.7 359.7 4,235.0 4,008.2 2,708.8 744.7 238.3 554.7 532.4 180.5 102.7
July 10,267.9 1,772.1 1,383.3 388.9 4,267.6 4,041.3 2,722.8 765.6 259.2 552.9 530.7 179.5 99.0
Aug. 10,627.2 1,785.7 1,403.5 382.2 4,322.0 4,089.0 2,760.7 777.8 272.2 550.5 528.3 185.0 103.0
Sep. 11,063.0 1,814.5 1,415.7 398.8 4,342.6 4,105.7 2,748.5 812.0 306.6 545.2 523.1 191.1 102.4
Oct. 11,036.0 1,837.4 1,419.0 418.4 4,359.6 4,122.0 2,741.6 838.3 334.6 542.1 519.8 190.0 92.4
Nov. 10,762.4 1,773.7 1,345.0 428.7 4,401.0 4,132.6 2,752.4 843.3 344.7 536.8 514.3 193.1 97.3
Dec. 10,517.9 1,618.6 1,231.6 387.0 4,343.5 4,093.8 2,712.1 848.6 353.7 533.2 510.2 180.5 84.1
2023 Jan. 10,585.0 1,642.4 1,231.2 411.2 4,392.0 4,124.2 2,706.4 895.1 397.6 522.7 498.8 188.7 94.3
Feb. 10,760.9 1,633.5 1,226.0 407.5 4,391.4 4,113.2 2,670.6 926.7 428.4 515.9 490.8 191.2 97.2
Mar. 10,553.8 1,618.0 1,210.4 407.6 4,368.3 4,092.1 2,625.3 959.7 462.3 507.2 480.5 197.9 98.8
Apr. 10,564.3 1,632.8 1,227.7 405.1 4,370.1 4,099.8 2,620.9 980.3 482.3 498.6 470.4 199.5 93.6
May 10,653.7 1,622.7 1,229.8 392.9 4,384.2 4,108.2 2,613.0 1,004.7 504.1 490.6 460.2 201.6 97.9
June 10,577.7 1,530.6 1,149.6 381.0 4,378.1 4,110.1 2,586.3 1,040.5 541.1 483.3 450.2 196.6 90.9
July 10,743.2 1,563.0 1,159.8 403.2 4,382.4 4,116.2 2,569.6 1,070.7 572.0 475.9 439.9 197.0 90.2
Aug. 10,735.3 1,549.2 1,162.1 387.0 4,388.3 4,124.6 2,555.7 1,101.4 603.4 467.5 428.7 191.6 87.5
Sep. 10,737.5 1,500.0 1,112.7 387.3 4,384.5 4,126.8 2,545.8 1,119.2 620.4 461.8 420.1 193.4 89.5
Oct. 10,797.9 1,530.0 1,132.1 398.0 4,398.0 4,135.1 2,528.3 1,151.4 653.5 455.4 410.8 198.1 88.2
Nov. 10,610.8 1,547.2 1,136.6 410.5 4,414.1 4,158.1 2,538.2 1,171.5 670.5 448.3 400.3 197.0 89.8
Dec. 10,321.8 1,487.6 1,098.0 389.6 4,421.2 4,176.3 2,531.9 1,198.6 694.4 445.9 395.3 186.5 76.1
Changes 4
2015 –191.4 –62.1 –50.3 –11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 –37.0 –10.1 –11.3 4.2 – 0.4 – 0.3
2016 184.3 –31.6 – 2.2 –29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 –11.1 1.4 – 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.9
2017 8.0 30.6 14.8 15.8 124.2 107.7 145.8 –32.5 –15.3 – 5.6 1.5 16.4 5.8
2018 101.8 –20.1 –25.7 5.6 112.4 114.7 137.7 –18.8 – 6.5 – 4.3 1.2 – 4.3 2.3
2019 483.4 12.6 –10.0 22.6 132.1 120.0 154.1 –30.6 – 6.6 – 3.4 – 0.6 10.6 8.7
2020 769.5 340.0 317.0 23.0 244.9 188.4 277.6 –74.7 –34.9 –14.5 – 7.2 18.7 1.8
2021 207.2 133.4 103.4 30.0 107.3 96.2 141.4 –45.8 –23.3 0.6 3.9 16.6 13.6
2022 1,170.5 –15.6 –105.9 90.3 208.9 165.9 60.6 132.8 148.1 –27.5 –26.3 18.4 12.8
2023 –137.6 –134.2 –138.5 4.3 89.4 93.0 –173.4 348.7 339.5 –82.3 –109.9 7.2 – 7.0
2022 Apr. 283.1 25.1 15.6 9.5 8.0 11.0 7.5 4.1 7.2 – 0.6 – 0.4 – 3.1 – 6.6
May 1.1 0.7 9.8 – 9.1 13.6 10.6 18.9 – 6.9 – 5.0 – 1.3 – 1.2 1.0 3.9
June 178.6 –24.2 – 9.7 –14.5 – 2.8 – 6.6 –10.7 5.9 8.5 – 1.8 – 1.6 4.1 5.6
July –177.9 24.6 – 1.6 26.2 29.3 30.8 13.0 19.6 19.9 – 1.8 – 1.7 – 2.0 – 3.9
Aug. 359.0 15.5 23.0 – 7.5 53.6 47.1 37.2 12.4 12.9 – 2.4 – 2.4 5.3 3.8
Sep. 428.4 25.2 11.7 13.5 19.0 15.4 –13.3 34.0 34.1 – 5.3 – 5.3 5.6 – 0.9
Oct. –19.3 24.2 3.8 20.3 17.2 16.2 – 7.3 26.6 28.2 – 3.1 – 3.3 – 0.7 – 9.7
Nov. –245.9 –60.3 –73.0 12.7 45.6 21.3 14.3 12.2 10.1 – 5.3 – 5.4 – 3.2 5.4
Dec. –225.1 –152.7 –112.7 –40.0 –55.4 –37.3 –39.2 5.6 9.4 – 3.7 – 4.1 –11.9 –12.8
2023 Jan. 87.5 23.3 0.0 23.3 49.1 30.9 –10.4 46.7 44.0 – 5.5 – 6.4 8.2 10.1
Feb. 167.0 –10.3 – 5.6 – 4.7 – 1.8 –11.8 –36.4 31.3 30.7 – 6.7 – 7.9 2.1 2.7
Mar. –195.2 –13.4 –14.7 1.3 –21.7 –20.0 –44.1 32.8 33.5 – 8.7 –10.3 7.1 1.8
Apr. 16.7 15.5 17.5 – 1.9 2.4 8.1 – 4.1 20.8 20.2 – 8.6 –10.1 1.8 – 5.1
May 91.9 –10.1 2.1 –12.1 13.1 8.4 – 7.9 24.3 21.7 – 8.0 –10.2 1.1 4.2
June –65.9 –90.3 –79.4 –11.0 – 6.3 1.5 –26.3 35.0 36.1 – 7.3 – 9.9 – 4.7 – 6.9
July 170.6 31.5 10.4 21.1 4.9 6.5 –16.4 30.2 31.0 – 7.3 –10.3 0.6 – 0.7
Aug. –15.1 –13.3 2.8 –16.1 6.4 7.9 –13.6 30.0 30.7 – 8.5 –11.2 – 4.4 – 2.4
Sep. 1.6 –49.2 –49.4 0.2 – 3.9 2.2 – 9.9 17.8 17.3 – 5.7 – 8.6 1.8 1.9
Oct. 68.3 30.9 19.9 11.0 13.8 8.5 –17.4 32.3 33.1 – 6.4 – 9.4 4.7 – 1.2
Nov. –174.8 18.9 5.1 13.8 17.5 23.9 10.6 20.4 17.2 – 7.1 –10.5 – 0.7 2.1
Dec. –290.2 –67.7 –47.3 –20.4 15.8 27.0 2.3 27.2 24.1 – 2.5 – 5.0 –10.5 –13.7
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.
1 See footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Excluding deposits of central governments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
23•
IV. Banks
  Debt securities issued  3
in other Member States  2 Deposits of
central governments
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Totalof which:
domestic
central
govern-
mentsLiabilities
arising
from
repos with
non-banks
in the
euro areaMoney
market
fund
shares
issued  3 Totalof which:
with
maturities
of up to
2 years  3Liabilities
to non-
euro 
area
residentsCapital
and
reservesOther
Liabilities  1 Period
End of year or month
42.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 2016
63.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 2017
56.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7 2018
59.0 16.5 2.7 2.4 12.0 11.2 1.5 1.9 1,063.2 32.3 559.4 728.6 935.6 2019
75.6 30.6 2.6 2.3 49.8 48.6 9.4 2.5 1,056.9 21.2 617.6 710.8 1,031.3 2020
80.7 22.8 2.4 2.2 44.2 43.5 2.2 2.3 1,110.8 27.5 757.2 732.3 809.0 2021
94.3 32.4 2.2 2.0 69.2 66.8 3.4 2.7 1,185.1 40.8 800.4 747.2 1,817.1 2022
108.4 37.8 2.0 1.6 58.4 52.1 5.0 3.2 1,278.6 80.2 723.0 785.1 1,618.0 2023
75.9 19.0 2.4 2.2 44.5 42.1 2.8 2.5 1,148.9 25.9 926.4 736.8 1,195.6 2022 Mar.
79.8 22.5 2.4 2.2 44.6 42.2 2.3 2.3 1,161.1 26.3 939.2 734.6 1,438.9 Apr.
76.8 19.9 2.3 2.1 46.6 42.8 1.9 2.5 1,164.1 27.7 958.5 732.3 1,396.8 May
75.5 19.1 2.3 2.1 46.2 43.0 2.0 2.5 1,164.7 32.2 945.7 752.0 1,582.6 June
78.1 23.2 2.3 2.1 46.8 44.0 4.2 2.5 1,177.1 35.9 926.6 743.6 1,374.2 July
79.7 24.3 2.3 2.1 47.9 44.0 4.8 2.4 1,183.7 38.6 950.2 741.8 1,636.6 Aug.
86.4 31.2 2.3 2.1 45.9 43.3 3.2 2.5 1,203.3 45.8 987.2 758.0 1,951.6 Sep.
95.4 39.7 2.2 2.1 47.6 44.9 4.0 2.6 1,202.6 39.4 980.8 751.8 1,897.2 Oct.
93.5 31.3 2.2 2.0 75.4 71.1 4.7 2.6 1,202.3 42.2 939.7 747.3 1,691.1 Nov.
94.3 32.4 2.2 2.0 69.2 66.8 3.4 2.7 1,185.1 40.8 800.4 747.2 1,817.1 Dec.
92.3 30.4 2.2 2.0 79.1 73.8 3.9 2.5 1,205.2 47.4 890.6 728.9 1,719.6 2023 Jan.
91.8 30.0 2.2 1.9 87.0 82.5 5.0 2.4 1,221.5 55.6 901.8 724.9 1,880.4 Feb.
97.0 28.5 2.1 1.9 78.2 73.3 4.7 2.6 1,231.2 64.6 863.1 734.8 1,731.0 Mar.
103.7 33.9 2.1 1.9 70.8 65.9 5.4 2.8 1,235.3 67.3 856.2 735.7 1,726.0 Apr.
101.6 30.7 2.1 1.8 74.4 62.4 6.0 2.6 1,257.3 72.3 888.2 746.9 1,745.8 May
103.6 32.5 2.0 1.8 71.4 64.0 4.8 2.6 1,253.9 75.7 853.4 749.6 1,804.7 June
104.8 33.2 2.0 1.7 69.2 61.5 6.5 2.9 1,262.0 76.3 855.0 757.2 1,914.3 July
102.0 32.4 2.0 1.7 72.2 61.5 5.8 3.0 1,271.3 83.5 840.0 765.2 1,912.5 Aug.
102.0 32.6 2.0 1.7 64.3 60.0 4.9 3.0 1,280.7 82.6 825.8 765.1 1,973.5 Sep.
107.9 37.8 2.0 1.6 64.8 59.7 6.2 2.9 1,288.5 84.7 843.9 755.9 1,972.3 Oct.
105.2 34.5 2.0 1.6 59.1 55.1 6.6 3.0 1,286.3 83.6 805.3 769.5 1,778.8 Nov.
108.4 37.8 2.0 1.6 58.4 52.1 5.0 3.2 1,278.6 80.2 723.0 785.1 1,618.0 Dec.
Changes 4
– 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 – 0.4 – 1.9 – 1.0 – 0.0 –86.8 7.7 –30.3 28.0 –143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 2.2 – 1.2 – 0.3 – 1.1 8.6 – 1.3 116.1 26.4 –39.5 2016
10.8 4.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.1 – 0.3 – 3.3 – 8.5 –16.1 34.1 –162.3 2017
– 6.4 – 4.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 2.1 2.1 – 2.6 0.3 30.0 – 5.9 –36.0 7.4 10.3 2018
2.0 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.1 1.4 1.4 5.6 – 0.5 22.3 0.1 –47.9 30.0 329.1 2019
17.0 14.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 37.8 37.3 3.6 0.6 11.8 – 9.3 61.6 – 1.5 108.5 2020
3.1 – 8.0 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 5.5 – 5.0 – 7.9 0.3 40.6 6.9 124.9 16.6 –207.9 2021
5.8 8.5 – 0.3 – 0.2 24.6 23.0 1.2 0.4 67.2 12.6 45.6 5.0 857.7 2022
14.4 6.7 – 0.2 – 0.4 –10.8 –14.7 1.8 0.5 108.1 42.2 –57.7 43.6 –189.1 2023
3.6 3.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.1 0.0 – 0.5 – 0.3 3.4 0.2 0.4 – 5.8 252.8 2022 Apr.
– 2.9 – 2.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 2.0 0.6 – 0.4 0.2 6.4 1.4 23.9 – 1.0 –42.4 May
– 1.5 – 1.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.4 0.2 0.1 – 0.0 – 4.8 4.3 – 6.3 17.6 199.0 June
1.9 3.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.5 1.1 2.1 0.1 9.1 3.5 –24.8 –10.5 –207.8 July
1.6 1.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.1 0.0 0.6 – 0.1 4.1 2.7 20.1 – 3.1 268.3 Aug.
6.5 6.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.0 – 0.7 – 1.6 0.1 15.8 7.0 31.8 14.9 323.1 Sep.
9.1 8.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.7 1.6 0.8 0.1 1.8 – 6.3 – 2.8 – 5.3 –55.3 Oct.
– 8.6 – 8.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 27.5 25.8 0.8 0.0 7.4 2.4 –29.9 – 1.1 –208.4 Nov.
1.0 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 6.3 – 4.3 – 1.3 0.1 –11.5 – 1.2 –132.1 1.9 125.9 Dec.
– 1.9 – 1.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 9.9 6.9 0.5 – 0.2 22.4 6.6 95.0 –17.6 –85.0 2023 Jan.
– 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 7.9 8.7 1.2 – 0.1 13.0 8.1 6.9 – 5.0 163.2 Feb.
5.3 – 1.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 8.8 – 9.2 – 0.3 0.3 13.6 9.2 –33.8 11.2 –151.2 Mar.
6.9 5.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 7.4 – 7.4 0.7 0.1 5.7 2.7 – 4.9 1.8 – 4.7 Apr.
– 3.1 – 3.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 3.6 – 3.5 0.6 – 0.1 23.4 6.5 32.0 9.4 23.5 May
2.1 2.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 3.0 1.6 – 1.1 – 0.0 0.4 4.1 –28.3 3.6 56.2 June
1.2 0.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.1 – 2.5 1.7 0.3 10.2 0.7 4.2 8.1 109.7 July
– 2.1 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 2.9 – 0.0 – 0.7 0.1 7.0 7.1 –18.9 7.2 – 2.8 Aug.
– 0.1 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 7.9 – 1.5 – 0.9 0.1 10.3 0.0 –14.2 – 1.0 60.4 Sep.
5.9 5.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.6 – 0.3 1.4 – 0.1 8.3 2.2 19.1 – 4.6 – 0.4 Oct.
– 2.8 – 3.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 5.7 – 4.6 0.4 0.1 2.0 – 1.0 –32.8 14.8 –195.8 Nov.
3.2 3.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.7 – 3.0 – 1.6 0.1 – 8.1 – 3.9 –82.1 15.6 –162.2 Dec.
3 In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money
market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published togetherwith money market fund shares.  4 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
24•
IV. Banks
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Loans
End of
monthNumber of
reporting
institu-
tionsBalance
sheet
total  1Cash in
hand and
credit
balances
with
central
banks TotalBalances
and
loansSecurities
issued by
banks Totalfor
up to and
including
1 yearfor
more than
1 year BillsSecurities
issued by
non-banksPartici-
pating
interestsOther
assets  1
All categories of banks
2023 July 1,370 10,805.6 87.6 3,563.9 3,073.6 485.0 5,011.3 486.5 3,804.7 0.1 700.4 97.3 2,045.4
Aug. 1,361 10,797.6 64.9 3,589.1 3,099.2 485.0 5,001.5 468.1 3,812.6 0.1 702.0 96.6 2,045.6
Sep. 1,353 10,799.9 68.2 3,508.2 3,022.6 481.1 5,006.9 477.4 3,809.0 0.1 700.8 96.7 2,119.9
Oct. 1,346 10,860.6 80.2 3,563.9 3,078.6 480.9 5,008.8 479.2 3,813.1 0.1 698.8 97.0 2,110.7
Nov. 1,334 10,674.4 62.9 3,566.2 3,076.8 485.1 5,029.2 482.3 3,824.2 0.1 704.1 97.2 1,919.0
Dec. 1,334 10,398.2 71.2 3,447.6 2,963.9 479.8 5,005.1 453.4 3,824.2 0.1 714.2 97.1 1,777.1
Commercial banks 6
2023 Nov. 240 4,951.7 21.1 1,688.7 1,600.8 87.7 1,635.6 325.4 1,049.0 0.1 253.6 31.2 1,575.1
Dec. 240 4,743.3 25.1 1,608.9 1,524.3 84.3 1,622.2 298.8 1,050.0 0.1 267.0 30.9 1,456.1
Big banks 7
2023 Nov. 3 2,489.9 9.8 697.6 664.1 33.5 758.1 165.1 452.2 0.0 137.1 25.3 999.1
Dec. 3 2,385.6 11.6 674.1 640.7 33.4 754.0 152.4 450.6 0.0 148.3 25.3 920.7
Regional banks and other commercial banks
2023 Nov. 131 1,957.1 8.1 658.6 607.6 50.7 725.8 112.7 502.9 0.1 107.3 4.3 560.5
Dec. 130 1,850.1 9.7 597.1 549.3 47.6 718.3 100.7 505.6 0.1 109.3 4.6 520.3
Branches of foreign banks
2023 Nov. 106 504.7 3.3 332.5 329.2 3.4 151.7 47.6 93.9 – 9.2 1.6 15.6
Dec. 107 507.5 3.9 337.8 334.2 3.3 149.9 45.7 93.8 – 9.4 0.9 15.1
Landesbanken
2023 Nov. 6 909.2 2.4 346.3 292.1 53.2 428.5 42.5 345.6 0.0 35.0 9.5 122.6
Dec. 6 858.0 4.3 306.0 251.6 53.4 422.9 40.9 345.8 0.0 33.7 9.6 115.2
Savings banks
2023 Nov. 354 1,557.7 20.6 276.3 158.7 117.6 1,218.7 53.4 999.7 – 165.4 16.4 25.8
Dec. 354 1,557.0 24.3 276.3 159.4 116.9 1,215.4 52.3 998.6 – 164.3 16.5 24.5
Credit cooperatives
2023 Nov. 694 1,170.6 13.3 212.2 103.8 108.2 892.5 34.9 739.4 0.0 118.3 20.1 32.4
Dec. 694 1,172.2 15.1 212.6 105.6 106.9 892.6 35.8 739.1 0.0 117.7 20.2 31.6
Mortgage banks
2023 Nov. 7 225.9 0.1 19.5 13.0 6.6 200.4 3.3 182.8 – 14.3 0.1 5.7
Dec. 7 224.2 0.1 17.9 11.3 6.6 200.6 3.2 183.1 – 14.3 0.1 5.4
Building and loan associations
2023 Nov. 15 258.8 0.1 41.1 25.4 15.7 213.4 1.2 190.3 . 21.9 0.3 4.0
Dec. 15 259.5 0.1 41.5 25.6 15.9 213.9 1.2 190.9 . 21.8 0.3 3.7
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2023 Nov. 18 1,600.4 5.1 982.1 883.1 96.1 440.1 21.7 317.5 0.0 95.7 19.6 153.5
Dec. 18 1,584.0 2.1 984.4 886.1 95.8 437.5 21.2 316.7 0.0 95.4 19.5 140.6
Memo item:    Foreign banks 8
2023 Nov. 137 2,455.1 9.1 857.5 820.3 36.9 699.4 149.2 423.1 0.1 121.3 3.5 885.6
Dec. 138 2,310.5 10.0 804.3 769.6 34.3 691.6 135.9 424.2 0.1 126.0 2.8 801.8
of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2023 Nov. 31 1,950.4 5.8 525.0 491.2 33.6 547.7 101.7 329.2 0.1 112.2 1.9 870.0
Dec. 31 1,802.9 6.1 466.5 435.4 31.0 541.7 90.2 330.4 0.1 116.6 1.9 786.7
* Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified as
MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3.  1 Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative financial
instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the meaning ofSection 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handelsgesetzbuch) read
in conjunction with Section 35 (1) number 1a of the Credit Institution Accounting
Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute) are classified
under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting date. Trading
portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Series Banking statistics, in
Tables I.1 to I.3.  2 For building and loan associations: including deposits under savings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
25•
IV. Banks
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4
TotalSight
depositsTime
deposits TotalSight
depositsfor
up to and
including
1 yearfor
more
than
1 year  2Memo
item:
Liabilities
arising
from
repos  3 Totalof which:
At 3
months'
noticeBank
savings
bondsBearer
debt
securities
out-
standing  5Capital
including
published
reserves,
partici-
pation
rights
capital,
funds for
general
banking
risksOther
liabi-
lities  1End of
month
All categories of banks
2,212.3 717.1 1,495.1 4,591.2 2,786.2 572.0 672.6 81.2 480.7 444.1 79.7 1,335.1 610.3 2,056.7 2023 July
2,184.0 705.0 1,479.0 4,596.2 2,766.9 597.8 667.8 78.9 472.2 432.8 91.4 1,346.6 610.8 2,060.0 Aug.
2,118.8 674.3 1,444.5 4,593.2 2,764.3 593.6 671.1 80.8 466.5 424.2 97.8 1,351.5 611.6 2,124.8 Sep.
2,153.9 695.6 1,458.2 4,621.2 2,751.6 624.0 673.2 88.2 460.1 414.7 112.4 1,351.7 611.8 2,122.0 Oct.
2,140.3 677.9 1,462.3 4,629.8 2,759.2 609.7 676.7 84.7 452.9 404.1 131.3 1,359.8 611.1 1,933.3 Nov.
2,022.2 605.9 1,416.3 4,611.6 2,719.0 615.3 683.6 66.0 450.5 399.1 143.2 1,365.0 611.8 1,787.5 Dec.
Commercial banks 6
1,122.3 522.1 600.2 1,898.7 1,205.1 321.7 243.2 82.8 85.8 63.9 42.8 205.1 212.3 1,513.2 2023 Nov.
1,053.1 461.7 591.4 1,873.9 1,175.8 318.5 244.9 64.9 86.2 62.6 48.5 206.8 212.9 1,396.5 Dec.
Big banks 7
422.1 181.8 240.3 881.4 538.1 190.2 72.5 46.6 76.7 55.6 4.0 151.9 79.6 954.9 2023 Nov.
410.9 149.5 261.5 866.6 527.0 185.8 72.7 34.1 77.2 54.5 4.0 152.8 79.6 875.7 Dec.
Regional banks and other commercial banks
448.9 218.2 230.7 800.8 519.5 84.4 149.3 36.3 8.9 8.1 38.7 51.8 115.8 539.9 2023 Nov.
392.4 177.9 214.6 787.6 500.5 84.3 149.4 30.8 8.8 7.9 44.5 52.6 116.3 501.2 Dec.
Branches of foreign banks
251.3 122.1 129.1 216.5 147.6 47.1 21.5 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.1 1.4 17.0 18.4 2023 Nov.
249.8 134.4 115.4 219.8 148.3 48.4 22.8 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.1 1.4 17.0 19.6 Dec.
Landesbanken
226.4 40.2 186.2 295.7 146.4 72.2 71.0 1.0 4.5 4.4 1.7 215.8 43.1 128.2 2023 Nov.
207.1 33.1 174.0 279.7 136.2 65.6 71.7 0.1 4.5 4.4 1.8 211.8 43.2 116.2 Dec.
Savings banks
171.1 4.7 166.4 1,165.4 780.5 80.3 17.3 – 220.9 202.7 66.4 21.4 141.1 58.8 2023 Nov.
160.5 3.6 156.9 1,175.9 783.1 85.0 18.1 – 218.7 200.1 71.1 21.6 141.1 58.0 Dec.
Credit cooperatives
161.8 3.6 158.1 854.6 550.4 107.0 35.8 – 141.3 132.6 20.0 8.7 105.4 40.1 2023 Nov.
159.1 2.6 156.6 859.6 548.1 111.5 37.9 – 140.7 131.5 21.3 9.1 105.5 38.9 Dec.
Mortgage banks
45.5 3.4 42.1 54.2 2.6 5.7 45.9 0.6 – – . 109.5 8.9 7.8 2023 Nov.
44.3 3.1 41.2 54.0 1.9 5.8 46.3 0.7 – – . 109.3 8.9 7.7 Dec.
Building and loan associations
37.4 3.4 34.0 192.9 3.5 2.4 186.5 – 0.4 0.4 0.1 6.6 13.0 8.9 2023 Nov.
37.9 2.7 35.2 193.9 3.6 2.4 187.4 – 0.4 0.4 0.1 6.6 13.0 8.1 Dec.
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
375.8 100.5 275.3 168.3 70.6 20.3 77.0 0.3 – – . 792.6 87.3 176.4 2023 Nov.
360.2 99.2 261.0 174.6 70.3 26.6 77.4 0.3 – – . 799.9 87.2 162.1 Dec.
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
659.9 341.5 318.5 774.3 503.2 133.7 105.2 41.4 9.7 9.3 22.5 51.2 100.6 869.1 2023 Nov.
602.9 312.3 290.6 764.1 489.4 133.1 107.2 32.2 9.2 8.7 25.1 51.5 100.6 791.4 Dec.
of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
408.7 219.3 189.3 557.8 355.5 86.6 83.7 41.4 9.5 9.0 22.4 49.7 83.6 850.7 2023 Nov.
353.2 177.9 175.3 544.3 341.1 84.7 84.5 32.2 9.0 8.5 25.0 50.1 83.6 771.8 Dec.
and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  3 Included in time deposits.  4 Excluding deposits
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2).  5 Including subordinated
negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
6 Commercial banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other
commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign banks”.  7 Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner
Bank AG (up to Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische
Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG), Deutsche Postbank AG (from December 2004 up to April2018) and DB Privat- und Firmenkundenbank AG (from May 2018) (see the explanatory
notes in the Statistical Series Banking statistics, Table I.3, banking group “Big banks “).
8 Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in other categories
of banks and the category ”Branches (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”.
9 Separate presentation of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks included in
other banking categories.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
26•
IV. Banks
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
PeriodCash in
hand
(euro area
banknotes
and
coins)Credit
balances
with the
Bundes-
bank TotalCredit
balances
and loans BillsNegotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
banksSecurities
issued by
banksMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total Loans BillsTreasury
bills and
negotiable
money mar-
ket paper
issued by
non-banksSecurities
issued
by non-
banks  1
End of year or month *
2013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2017 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
2018 40.4 416.1 1,323.5 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 239.0 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.9
2019 43.2 476.6 1,254.7 1,016.2 0.0 0.7 237.9 4.5 3,521.5 3,119.2 0.3 3.3 398.7
2020 47.2 792.9 1,367.9 1,119.7 0.0 0.7 247.5 8.8 3,647.0 3,245.1 0.2 4.0 397.7
2021 49.4 905.0 1,409.6 1,163.7 – 0.5 245.3 10.3 3,798.1 3,392.4 0.3 2.6 402.8
2022 19.8 67.3 2,347.0 2,101.4 – 1.0 244.6 12.1 4,015.6 3,613.1 0.2 2.7 399.6
2022 July 41.6 1,084.2 1,454.9 1,206.8 – 0.8 247.2 9.8 3,945.0 3,539.1 0.2 3.6 402.2
Aug. 23.1 1,126.7 1,480.7 1,232.0 – 1.3 247.5 9.9 3,976.0 3,574.3 0.1 3.9 397.7
Sep. 20.4 122.4 2,573.9 2,319.2 – 1.4 253.2 9.8 3,993.6 3,595.3 0.2 3.6 394.5
Oct. 19.7 86.6 2,592.3 2,337.0 – 1.5 253.7 10.0 4,014.1 3,611.6 0.2 4.3 398.0
Nov. 18.8 88.4 2,524.4 2,271.2 – 1.5 251.7 11.1 4,025.7 3,625.3 0.2 3.6 396.7
Dec. 19.8 67.3 2,347.0 2,101.4 – 1.0 244.6 12.1 4,015.6 3,613.1 0.2 2.7 399.6
2023 Jan. 18.0 89.5 2,443.6 2,198.1 – 1.0 244.5 12.7 4,016.2 3,622.4 0.1 4.3 389.4
Feb. 17.8 52.2 2,471.9 2,222.2 – 1.0 248.8 12.8 4,030.2 3,629.4 0.1 2.9 397.9
Mar. 17.7 53.5 2,426.8 2,175.1 – 1.0 250.7 12.6 4,030.5 3,634.7 0.1 4.3 391.4
Apr. 18.7 54.2 2,434.7 2,182.3 – 1.1 251.3 12.7 4,032.5 3,641.2 0.1 3.2 388.1
May 18.1 48.7 2,483.6 2,230.4 – 0.8 252.4 12.7 4,039.0 3,650.5 0.1 2.2 386.2
June 17.5 51.6 2,366.1 2,114.1 – 0.9 251.0 12.7 4,042.1 3,645.6 0.1 2.9 393.5
July 17.0 69.9 2,369.8 2,118.4 – 1.1 250.3 12.8 4,048.7 3,653.9 0.1 3.2 391.6
Aug. 17.3 46.7 2,392.0 2,139.7 – 1.2 251.1 12.9 4,046.7 3,649.9 0.1 2.5 394.2
Sep. 17.9 49.6 2,305.0 2,056.1 – 1.0 247.8 12.9 4,048.1 3,653.5 0.1 3.4 391.1
Oct. 17.4 62.2 2,351.7 2,102.8 – 0.8 248.0 13.1 4,051.9 3,656.6 0.1 3.0 392.2
Nov. 16.7 45.5 2,375.9 2,122.3 – 0.9 252.7 13.3 4,057.9 3,661.2 0.1 3.1 393.6
Dec. 18.5 52.0 2,280.7 2,029.3 – 0.8 250.6 24.2 4,044.3 3,650.0 0.1 0.9 393.4
Changes *
2014 +0.4 – 4.3 –119.3 – 87.1 +0.0 + 0.4 –32.6 +0.1 +36.7 +20.6 –0.1 – 0.6 +16.8
2015 +0.3 + 73.7 – 80.7 – 4.3 –0.0 – 0.4 –75.9 –0.1 +68.9 +54.1 –0.0 – 0.3 +15.1
2016 +6.5 +129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 – – 0.9 –17.9 +0.4 +43.7 +62.8 –0.1 – 0.1 –18.9
2017 +6.1 +108.4 + 50.3 + 70.4 –0.0 + 0.0 –20.1 –0.1 +57.0 +70.2 +0.0 + 0.4 –13.6
2018 +8.5 + 24.0 – 81.0 – 76.6 +0.0 + 0.1 – 4.4 +3.8 +71.5 +105.4 –0.1 – 0.5 –33.2
2019 +2.8 + 59.7 – 63.0 – 61.1 –0.0 – 0.2 – 1.6 –1.4 +126.7 +129.1 +0.1 + 3.1 – 5.5
2020 +4.1 +316.4 +201.2 +191.6 –0.0 + 0.0 + 9.6 +4.3 +123.2 +123.6 –0.1 + 0.7 – 1.0
2021 +2.2 +111.8 + 44.1 + 46.3 –0.0 – 0.2 – 2.0 +1.5 +152.2 +147.8 +0.0 – 2.2 + 6.6
2022 –29.6 –836.6 +938.0 +938.1 – + 0.2 – 0.3 +1.7 +216.7 +220.1 –0.1 + 0.1 – 3.3
2022 July –9.5 – 6.8 – 7.5 – 7.6 – + 0.1 – 0.0 –0.1 +36.1 +23.5 +0.0 – 0.1 +12.7
Aug. –18.5 + 42.5 + 29.0 + 28.3 – + 0.2 + 0.5 +0.1 +30.9 +35.1 –0.0 + 0.3 – 4.5
Sep. –2.7 –1,004.3 +1,092.9 +1,087.0 – + 0.2 + 5.7 –0.0 +16.5 +19.9 +0.1 – 0.3 – 3.2
Oct. –0.7 – 35.8 + 18.5 + 17.8 – + 0.1 + 0.6 +0.2 +20.7 +16.6 –0.0 + 0.7 + 3.5
Nov. –0.8 + 1.8 – 67.6 – 65.5 – – 0.0 – 2.1 +1.1 +12.0 +13.9 –0.0 – 0.7 – 1.3
Dec. +1.0 – 19.9 –177.4 –169.9 – – 0.5 – 7.0 +1.0 – 9.6 –11.7 +0.0 – 0.9 + 2.9
2023 Jan. –1.8 + 22.2 + 96.7 + 96.7 – + 0.0 – 0.1 +0.6 + 0.6 + 9.2 –0.1 + 1.6 –10.3
Feb. –0.2 – 37.4 + 28.6 + 24.3 – + 0.0 + 4.3 +0.2 +13.3 + 6.3 –0.0 – 1.5 + 8.5
Mar. –0.1 + 1.3 – 45.1 – 47.0 – + 0.0 + 1.9 –0.1 + 0.9 + 6.0 +0.0 + 1.4 – 6.5
Apr. +1.0 + 0.7 + 7.8 + 7.2 – + 0.1 + 0.6 +0.1 + 2.1 + 6.5 +0.0 – 1.2 – 3.2
May –0.7 – 5.5 + 48.9 + 48.1 – – 0.3 + 1.1 –0.0 + 6.5 + 9.4 +0.0 – 1.0 – 1.9
June –0.5 + 2.9 –116.9 –115.7 – + 0.1 – 1.3 +0.0 + 4.4 – 3.7 –0.0 + 0.7 + 7.4
July –0.5 + 18.4 + 3.7 + 4.3 – + 0.2 – 0.8 +0.1 + 6.6 + 8.3 –0.0 + 0.2 – 1.9
Aug. +0.3 – 23.2 + 22.2 + 21.3 – + 0.1 + 0.8 +0.1 – 1.9 – 4.0 +0.0 – 0.6 + 2.7
Sep. +0.6 + 2.8 – 87.0 – 83.6 – – 0.2 – 3.3 +0.1 + 1.3 + 3.7 +0.0 + 0.9 – 3.2
Oct. –0.5 + 12.7 + 46.8 + 46.8 – – 0.2 + 0.2 +0.2 + 3.7 + 3.0 –0.0 – 0.4 + 1.1
Nov. –0.6 – 16.7 + 24.2 + 19.5 – + 0.1 + 4.6 +0.1 + 6.1 + 4.7 +0.0 + 0.1 + 1.3
Dec. +1.8 + 6.5 – 95.5 – 93.3 – – 0.1 – 2.0 +0.6 –12.5 –10.2 –0.0 – 2.2 – 0.1
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange ofequalisation claims (see also footnote 2).  2 Including debt securities arising from the
exchange of equalisation claims.  3 Including liabilities arising from registered debt
securities, registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities;

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
27•
IV. Banks
Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Equalisa-
tion
claims  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loansPartici-
pating
interests
in
domestic
banks
and
enterprises TotalSight
deposits
4Time
deposits
4Redis-
counted
bills  5Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
de-
positsTime
deposits
6Savings
de-
posits  7Bank
savings
bonds  8Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
– 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013
– 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
– 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
– 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016
– 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 2017
– 18.0 90.9 1,020.9 105.5 915.4 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9 2018
– 17.3 90.4 1,010.2 107.2 902.9 0.0 4.4 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 575.2 33.2 32.5 2019
– 23.5 78.3 1,236.7 125.0 1,111.6 0.0 13.1 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 560.6 28.3 34.4 2020
– 25.7 79.2 1,338.4 117.2 1,221.3 0.0 16.4 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 561.2 24.5 34.2 2021
– 25.6 80.3 1,231.6 136.9 1,094.7 0.0 15.7 4,162.0 2,720.6 873.5 533.2 34.6 35.9 2022
– 25.9 80.3 1,383.3 134.3 1,249.0 0.0 16.6 4,086.4 2,729.0 780.4 553.0 24.1 33.0 2022 July
– 25.9 79.8 1,403.5 136.0 1,267.5 – 16.5 4,134.3 2,766.8 792.0 550.6 25.0 33.0 Aug.
– 25.8 80.2 1,415.7 149.2 1,266.5 0.0 16.7 4,149.9 2,755.6 823.1 545.2 25.9 33.2 Sep.
– 25.8 80.4 1,419.0 138.1 1,280.9 0.0 16.1 4,168.4 2,748.7 849.3 542.2 28.1 33.6 Oct.
– 25.9 80.2 1,345.0 135.4 1,209.6 0.0 16.1 4,205.6 2,767.9 869.3 536.9 31.5 34.8 Nov.
– 25.6 80.3 1,231.6 136.9 1,094.7 0.0 15.7 4,162.0 2,720.6 873.5 533.2 34.6 35.9 Dec.
– 25.6 80.0 1,231.2 142.6 1,088.7 0.0 15.6 4,199.7 2,722.8 913.5 522.7 40.6 36.9 2023 Jan.
– 25.6 80.2 1,226.0 140.7 1,085.3 0.0 15.6 4,197.1 2,687.7 947.9 516.0 45.5 37.2 Feb.
– 24.6 80.3 1,210.4 137.0 1,073.4 0.0 15.2 4,167.4 2,639.8 968.6 507.2 51.7 36.4 Mar.
– 24.7 80.9 1,227.7 140.8 1,086.9 0.0 15.2 4,167.3 2,632.0 978.5 498.6 58.3 36.5 Apr.
– 24.7 81.1 1,229.8 137.8 1,091.9 0.0 15.1 4,172.9 2,623.9 993.0 490.6 65.4 36.6 May
– 24.4 81.2 1,149.6 134.0 1,015.6 0.0 14.6 4,176.3 2,600.9 1,020.0 483.3 72.1 36.5 June
– 24.4 81.0 1,159.8 134.8 1,025.0 0.0 14.6 4,180.2 2,582.2 1,042.9 475.9 79.1 36.7 July
– 24.4 80.3 1,162.1 138.5 1,023.7 0.0 14.5 4,188.4 2,568.4 1,061.7 467.5 90.7 36.9 Aug.
– 24.2 80.4 1,112.7 137.4 975.3 0.0 14.1 4,189.3 2,558.0 1,072.5 461.8 97.0 37.1 Sep.
– 24.1 80.3 1,132.1 136.7 995.4 0.0 14.0 4,198.0 2,544.5 1,086.5 455.4 111.6 37.3 Oct.
– 24.0 80.6 1,136.6 140.0 996.7 0.0 14.0 4,217.3 2,552.9 1,085.6 448.3 130.5 37.6 Nov.
– 23.8 80.2 1,098.0 136.0 962.0 0.0 13.5 4,231.0 2,542.8 1,100.1 445.9 142.2 50.1 Dec.
Changes *
– –1.9 +2.0 –29.0 + 2.2 –31.2 –0.0 –0.6 +69.7 +107.9 –25.3 – 2.4 –10.6 –2.0 2014
– –2.1 –4.3 –46.6 + 3.3 –50.0 +0.0 –1.3 +106.5 +156.2 –28.3 –11.3 –10.1 –1.6 2015
– –1.3 +1.5 – 1.7 + 0.3 – 2.0 +0.0 –0.5 +104.7 +124.5 – 6.9 – 7.9 –5.0 –0.5 2016
– –0.0 –1.6 +11.0 –18.4 +29.4 –0.0 –0.5 +103.1 +142.8 –27.5 – 5.6 –6.7 +0.4 2017
– –1.0 +3.1 –25.0 – 3.1 –21.9 +0.0 –0.4 +117.7 +139.3 –10.8 – 4.3 –6.5 +3.9 2018
– –0.7 +0.1 – 8.6 + 1.6 –10.2 +0.0 –0.3 +122.5 +155.8 –25.7 – 3.4 –4.1 –1.4 2019
– +5.7 –3.3 +313.4 +23.2 +290.2 –0.0 +8.2 +221.6 +273.7 –32.7 –14.5 –4.9 +1.9 2020
– +2.3 +1.0 +105.2 – 7.4 +112.6 +0.0 +3.3 +95.3 +144.3 –46.2 + 0.7 –3.5 –0.2 2021
– –0.1 +1.7 –104.6 + 8.8 –113.4 –0.0 –0.6 +191.8 +65.8 +143.4 –27.5 +10.1 +1.7 2022
– –0.2 +1.5 – 1.1 –12.4 +11.2 – –0.3 +33.5 +14.3 +20.7 – 1.8 +0.3 –0.5 2022 July
– –0.0 +0.1 +23.3 + 1.8 +21.6 –0.0 –0.1 +48.1 +37.8 +11.8 – 2.4 +0.9 +0.0 Aug.
– –0.0 +0.4 +12.2 +13.2 – 0.9 +0.0 +0.1 +15.6 –11.4 +31.3 – 5.3 +0.9 +0.2 Sep.
– –0.0 +0.1 + 3.5 –10.9 +14.4 +0.0 –0.5 +17.4 – 8.0 +26.2 – 3.1 +2.2 +0.4 Oct.
– +0.1 –0.1 –73.9 – 2.6 –71.3 –0.0 –0.1 +45.3 +20.9 +26.3 – 5.3 +3.4 +1.3 Nov.
– –0.3 +0.1 –113.2 – 8.5 –104.7 –0.0 –0.4 –43.4 –47.1 + 4.2 – 3.7 +3.2 +1.1 Dec.
– –0.0 –0.4 – 0.3 + 5.8 – 6.1 +0.0 –0.1 +37.6 – 2.9 +40.0 – 5.5 +6.0 +1.0 2023 Jan.
– –0.0 +0.2 – 5.2 – 1.9 – 3.4 – –0.0 – 2.5 –35.0 +34.4 – 6.7 +4.8 +0.4 Feb.
– –0.3 +0.1 –15.2 – 3.7 –11.5 – –0.4 –29.6 –47.3 +20.2 – 8.7 +6.2 –0.1 Mar.
– +0.0 +1.1 +17.3 + 3.8 +13.5 –0.0 –0.0 – 0.1 – 7.9 + 9.8 – 8.6 +6.6 +0.0 Apr.
– +0.0 +0.2 + 2.1 – 3.0 + 5.0 –0.0 –0.1 + 5.6 – 7.9 +14.5 – 8.0 +7.1 +0.1 May
– –0.4 +0.1 –79.7 – 3.7 –76.0 +0.0 –0.5 + 2.3 –23.0 +26.0 – 7.3 +6.7 –0.1 June
– +0.0 –0.1 +10.2 + 0.8 + 9.4 – –0.0 + 3.8 –18.7 +22.8 – 7.3 +7.0 +0.2 July
– +0.1 –0.8 + 3.1 + 3.9 – 0.8 +0.0 –0.1 + 8.2 –13.2 +21.3 – 8.5 +8.5 +0.2 Aug.
– –0.2 +0.1 –49.4 – 1.1 –48.3 –0.0 –0.4 + 0.9 –10.5 +10.7 – 5.7 +6.3 +0.2 Sep.
– –0.1 –0.1 +19.9 – 0.7 +20.6 –0.0 –0.1 + 8.7 –13.4 +14.0 – 6.4 +14.6 +0.3 Oct.
– –0.1 +0.3 + 4.6 + 3.3 + 1.3 +0.0 –0.0 +19.3 + 8.5 – 1.0 – 7.1 +18.8 +0.3 Nov.
– –0.2 –0.3 –47.3 –12.4 –34.8 –0.0 –0.5 +22.4 – 0.7 +13.7 – 2.5 +11.8 +1.2 Dec.
including subordinated liabilities.  4 Including liabilities arising from monetary policy
operations with the Bundesbank.  5 Own acceptances and promissory notes
outstanding.  6 Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999,including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  7 Excluding
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8).  8 Including liabilities
arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
28•
IV. Banks
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Credit balances and loans, bills Loans and bills
PeriodCash in
hand
(non-
euro area
banknotes
and
coins) Total TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termNegotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
banksSecurities
issued by
banksMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termTreasury
bills and
negotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
non-banksSecurities
issued by
non-banks
End of year or month *
2013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2017 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
2018 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.1
2019 0.2 1,064.2 814.0 532.7 281.3 1.8 248.5 3.7 795.3 513.1 111.0 402.1 7.7 274.5
2020 0.2 1,024.3 784.8 532.1 252.8 2.6 236.8 4.0 822.8 523.0 125.4 397.5 11.3 288.5
2021 0.3 1,100.7 877.5 614.7 262.7 0.4 222.8 3.5 871.2 572.2 151.5 420.7 8.0 290.9
2022 0.2 1,151.3 926.6 656.2 270.4 1.7 223.0 3.7 913.7 616.2 173.0 443.2 14.9 282.6
2022 July 0.6 1,248.0 1,021.1 748.0 273.1 2.7 224.2 3.5 929.4 615.7 177.0 438.7 12.7 301.0
Aug. 0.5 1,266.1 1,038.5 756.2 282.4 3.4 224.2 3.4 931.5 624.9 183.9 441.0 13.4 293.2
Sep. 0.3 1,287.8 1,057.9 771.9 286.0 4.2 225.8 3.8 935.5 629.4 185.2 444.2 12.4 293.7
Oct. 0.3 1,296.6 1,065.2 787.3 277.9 3.1 228.3 3.4 931.2 629.3 182.0 447.3 12.5 289.5
Nov. 0.2 1,273.7 1,043.2 766.3 276.9 2.9 227.6 3.5 938.8 631.7 187.5 444.2 12.5 294.6
Dec. 0.2 1,151.3 926.6 656.2 270.4 1.7 223.0 3.7 913.7 616.2 173.0 443.2 14.9 282.6
2023 Jan. 0.2 1,195.3 963.1 700.1 263.0 2.7 229.5 4.0 941.0 633.6 190.9 442.7 20.1 287.3
Feb. 0.2 1,201.5 965.7 701.9 263.8 2.9 232.9 4.2 946.4 635.5 190.5 444.9 15.8 295.1
Mar. 0.2 1,203.8 968.2 704.1 264.0 2.9 232.7 4.3 953.0 630.8 187.8 443.0 12.5 309.8
Apr. 0.2 1,184.1 946.5 681.7 264.8 3.6 234.0 4.2 959.3 633.6 191.7 441.9 13.9 311.8
May 0.2 1,211.3 972.8 706.0 266.8 3.4 235.1 4.2 965.1 638.1 193.4 444.7 14.6 312.4
June 0.2 1,177.3 939.1 681.7 257.4 3.6 234.6 4.3 961.8 628.4 181.4 447.0 15.8 317.6
July 0.2 1,194.1 955.3 694.8 260.5 4.1 234.7 4.3 962.7 637.4 190.4 447.0 16.4 308.9
Aug. 0.2 1,197.1 959.5 693.8 265.7 3.7 233.9 4.3 954.8 630.9 181.3 449.6 16.2 307.8
Sep. 0.2 1,203.3 966.5 687.9 278.6 3.5 233.3 4.2 958.8 633.0 183.8 449.2 16.1 309.7
Oct. 0.2 1,212.3 975.9 689.7 286.2 3.6 232.8 4.2 956.8 635.7 188.7 447.0 14.6 306.5
Nov. 0.2 1,190.3 954.5 674.0 280.5 3.3 232.4 4.2 971.3 645.4 194.5 450.9 15.3 310.6
Dec. 0.2 1,166.9 934.7 652.0 282.7 3.1 229.2 6.1 960.8 627.7 175.3 452.4 12.3 320.8
Changes *
2014 –0.0 +86.1 +80.1 +63.2 +16.8 +0.7 +5.3 –0.6 +5.7 –10.2 –12.8 +2.7 – 1.8 +17.7
2015 +0.1 –91.8 –86.0 –82.2 –3.8 –6.7 +0.8 –0.1 –6.1 –9.2 –6.5 –2.7 + 1.1 +2.0
2016 +0.0 –25.5 –14.5 –38.2 +23.7 –0.7 –10.3 –0.0 +17.4 +28.9 +10.1 +18.8 – 3.0 –8.5
2017 +0.0 –57.2 –48.7 –61.5 +12.8 +0.0 –8.5 +0.6 –4.7 +13.0 +8.6 +4.4 + 0.7 –18.4
2018 +0.0 +49.6 +34.0 +57.7 –23.7 +0.2 +15.3 +0.7 +18.3 +28.3 +3.2 +25.2 – 0.4 –9.7
2019 –0.0 –4.1 –11.3 –21.9 +10.7 +0.8 +6.3 +0.7 +26.8 +19.9 +12.7 +7.3 + 3.0 +3.8
2020 –0.0 –32.0 –22.4 –6.6 –15.8 +0.9 –10.5 +0.3 +34.4 +14.7 +9.0 +5.7 + 3.6 +16.1
2021 +0.0 +52.8 +71.1 +68.9 +2.2 –2.5 –15.8 –0.5 +37.8 +39.7 +29.8 +9.9 – 3.2 +1.4
2022 –0.1 +21.7 +20.4 +17.9 +2.6 +1.3 –0.0 +0.2 +37.0 +37.0 +16.8 +20.2 + 6.7 –6.7
2022 July –0.0 +8.4 +7.3 +1.7 +5.6 +0.5 +0.7 –0.1 –4.7 –0.7 –5.3 +4.6 – 1.1 –2.9
Aug. –0.1 +13.9 +13.2 +6.0 +7.2 +0.7 –0.0 –0.2 +0.1 +7.7 +6.3 +1.4 + 0.7 –8.4
Sep. –0.2 +15.0 +12.6 +11.8 +0.8 +0.8 +1.6 +0.4 +3.2 +1.4 –0.2 +1.6 – 1.0 +2.9
Oct. +0.0 +13.4 +11.9 +18.2 –6.3 –1.0 +2.5 –0.3 –2.2 +1.4 –2.9 +4.3 + 0.0 –3.6
Nov. –0.1 –9.4 –8.7 –13.4 +4.7 –0.2 –0.4 +0.1 +16.5 +9.7 +5.5 +4.2 – 0.0 +6.8
Dec. –0.0 –112.4 –106.8 –104.0 –2.8 –1.2 –4.4 +0.2 –19.9 –11.2 –12.7 +1.5 + 2.4 –11.1
2023 Jan. –0.0 +48.2 +40.6 +46.3 –5.7 +1.1 +6.5 +0.3 +30.0 +19.5 +18.6 +0.9 + 5.3 +5.2
Feb. +0.0 +0.6 –2.8 –1.2 –1.6 +0.1 +3.3 +0.2 +1.6 –1.2 –1.3 +0.1 – 4.4 +7.2
Mar. –0.0 +9.2 +9.2 +6.2 +3.0 –0.0 –0.1 +0.1 +11.2 –1.1 –1.5 +0.4 – 3.3 +15.5
Apr. +0.0 –17.0 –19.0 –20.9 +1.9 +0.7 +1.3 –0.1 +8.2 +4.4 +4.5 –0.1 + 1.5 +2.4
May +0.0 +16.9 +16.2 +18.0 –1.8 –0.2 +0.9 –0.0 +1.5 +1.4 +1.3 +0.1 + 0.6 –0.5
June +0.0 –17.7 –17.6 –9.9 –7.6 +0.2 –0.3 +0.1 –1.9 –8.7 –11.1 +2.4 + 1.2 +5.6
July –0.0 +18.4 +17.7 +13.9 +3.9 +0.5 +0.2 +0.0 +3.0 +10.5 +9.6 +0.9 + 0.7 –8.2
Aug. –0.0 +0.0 +1.3 –2.2 +3.5 –0.4 –0.9 –0.0 –10.2 –8.3 –9.8 +1.5 – 0.3 –1.6
Sep. +0.0 –1.0 –0.0 –10.1 +10.1 –0.2 –0.7 –0.0 –0.1 –1.2 +1.3 –2.5 – 0.1 +1.1
Oct. +0.0 +10.3 +10.6 +2.6 +8.0 +0.1 –0.4 –0.1 –0.7 +3.8 +5.2 –1.4 – 1.6 –3.0
Nov. – –14.4 –13.9 –11.5 –2.4 –0.2 –0.3 +0.0 +18.7 +12.9 +7.6 +5.3 + 0.8 +5.0
Dec. –0.0 –21.0 –17.6 –21.0 +3.4 –0.3 –3.2 +0.0 –9.3 –16.8 –18.7 +2.0 – 3.0 +10.5
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequentrevisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
29•
IV. Banks
Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Time deposits (including bank
savings bonds)Time deposits (including
savings deposits and bank
savings bonds)
Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loansPartici-
pating
interests
in foreign
banks
and
enter-
prises TotalSight
deposits TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
deposits TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
30.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 2013
14.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 2016
12.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 2017
11.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1 2018
11.5 21.3 680.6 339.3 341.2 243.2 98.0 – 229.8 112.3 117.4 60.5 57.0 0.1 2019
11.3 17.2 761.2 428.8 332.5 205.1 127.3 – 258.5 133.3 125.2 65.6 59.7 0.1 2020
11.1 16.6 914.6 456.0 458.6 301.5 157.2 0.0 288.2 141.9 146.2 68.7 77.6 0.1 2021
10.4 15.7 998.4 480.0 518.4 376.4 141.9 – 370.3 196.0 174.3 84.4 89.8 0.1 2022
10.6 15.8 1,107.4 608.8 498.6 359.0 139.6 0.0 390.2 221.6 168.6 87.5 81.1 0.3 2022 July
10.6 15.8 1,120.4 610.9 509.5 360.5 149.0 0.0 400.4 231.3 169.2 87.4 81.8 0.2 Aug.
10.6 15.9 1,169.6 639.0 530.6 373.0 157.6 0.0 409.1 231.4 177.7 95.7 82.0 0.2 Sep.
10.6 15.9 1,188.9 657.6 531.3 372.1 159.2 0.0 401.8 220.0 181.8 100.0 81.8 0.2 Oct.
10.6 15.8 1,150.7 612.1 538.7 385.9 152.7 – 414.1 235.1 179.0 91.2 87.7 0.1 Nov.
10.4 15.7 998.4 480.0 518.4 376.4 141.9 – 370.3 196.0 174.3 84.4 89.8 0.1 Dec.
10.4 15.6 1,089.4 601.2 488.3 344.5 143.8 – 405.1 213.5 191.5 101.9 89.6 0.2 2023 Jan.
10.4 15.8 1,086.8 600.1 486.7 345.1 141.6 – 418.4 218.4 200.0 109.9 90.1 0.2 Feb.
10.4 15.9 1,060.0 576.0 484.0 329.3 154.7 – 412.5 216.8 195.7 98.9 96.9 0.3 Mar.
10.4 15.9 1,042.6 540.6 502.0 343.8 158.2 – 423.3 208.8 214.6 116.6 97.9 0.3 Apr.
10.4 16.1 1,059.1 596.1 462.9 299.9 163.0 0.0 436.0 219.3 216.7 116.7 100.0 0.3 May
10.2 16.0 1,025.8 565.0 460.8 302.6 158.2 0.0 411.5 205.6 205.9 107.3 98.6 0.4 June
10.2 16.1 1,052.4 582.3 470.1 311.1 159.0 0.0 411.0 204.0 207.0 107.9 99.1 0.3 July
10.2 16.1 1,021.8 566.5 455.3 294.3 161.1 – 407.7 198.5 209.2 112.0 97.2 0.3 Aug.
10.2 16.1 1,006.0 536.9 469.1 293.9 175.2 – 403.9 206.3 197.6 100.2 97.4 0.4 Sep.
10.2 16.6 1,021.8 558.9 462.9 288.0 174.9 – 423.2 207.0 216.2 117.4 98.8 0.3 Oct.
10.4 16.4 1,003.7 538.0 465.7 291.0 174.6 – 412.5 206.3 206.3 107.1 99.2 0.3 Nov.
10.7 16.7 924.2 469.9 454.3 288.1 166.2 – 380.6 176.2 204.4 104.9 99.5 1.1 Dec.
Changes *
+ 0.1 – 3.8 +76.3 +47.8 +28.5 +39.0 –10.5 –0.0 –43.6 –8.3 –35.3 –30.7 –4.6 +0.2 2014
– 0.6 – 6.1 –15.4 +40.6 –56.0 –48.6 – 7.4 –0.0 –26.5 –13.9 –12.6 +0.3 –13.0 –0.0 2015
– 0.1 – 1.5 +82.7 +51.0 +31.7 +27.0 + 4.7 –0.0 +3.5 –3.1 +6.7 +5.9 +0.8 –0.0 2016
– 1.0 – 4.1 –15.5 +25.2 –40.8 –43.2 + 2.4 ±0.0 +31.8 +11.0 +20.8 +15.6 +5.2 –0.4 2017
– 0.2 – 2.2 –23.9 –23.4 – 0.4 + 2.1 – 2.6 –0.0 –11.9 –0.2 –11.8 –5.7 –6.0 –0.2 2018
– 0.3 – 0.9 – 9.5 –49.4 +39.8 +28.0 +11.8 –0.0 –0.8 +2.1 –2.9 –1.8 –1.1 –0.0 2019
– 0.2 – 3.9 +83.8 +87.8 – 4.1 –34.7 +30.6 – +23.6 +13.8 +9.8 +7.1 +2.8 +0.0 2020
– 0.2 – 0.8 +136.6 +19.8 +116.8 +89.2 +27.6 +0.0 +22.7 +6.4 +16.3 +0.0 +16.3 –0.0 2021
– 0.7 – 1.0 +85.8 +29.1 +56.7 +69.6 –13.0 –0.0 +68.2 +49.0 +19.2 +13.9 +5.3 +0.0 2022
– 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.3 –20.0 +19.7 +16.2 + 3.5 +0.0 +0.1 –2.2 +2.3 +4.0 –1.8 –0.0 2022 July
+ 0.1 + 0.0 + 9.7 +0.3 + 9.4 + 0.3 + 9.2 –0.0 +8.9 +9.1 –0.2 –0.7 +0.5 –0.0 Aug.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 +42.5 +25.4 +17.2 + 9.4 + 7.7 – +6.9 –0.7 +7.5 +7.5 –0.0 +0.0 Sep.
– + 0.0 +22.6 +20.5 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 1.9 – –5.9 –10.8 +5.0 +4.9 +0.1 –0.1 Oct.
– 0.0 – 0.0 –24.1 –41.3 +17.2 +17.4 – 0.2 –0.0 +5.3 +13.1 –7.9 –7.4 –0.5 –0.0 Nov.
– 0.2 – 0.0 –145.0 –128.3 –16.7 – 6.9 – 9.8 – –40.7 –37.2 –3.5 –6.2 +2.7 –0.0 Dec.
– 0.0 – 0.1 +93.8 +122.3 –28.4 –30.8 + 2.4 – +35.9 +18.1 +17.8 +17.9 –0.1 +0.0 2023 Jan.
+ 0.0 + 0.2 – 7.0 –3.5 – 3.5 – 0.9 – 2.6 – +11.6 +4.1 +7.5 +7.2 +0.3 +0.1 Feb.
+ 0.0 + 0.2 –21.8 –21.5 – 0.3 –13.9 +13.6 – –3.9 –0.8 –3.1 –10.0 +7.0 +0.1 Mar.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 –15.3 –34.3 +19.0 +15.2 + 3.8 – +11.7 –7.7 +19.3 +18.1 +1.2 –0.0 Apr.
+ 0.0 + 0.2 +10.1 +52.6 –42.5 –46.3 + 3.8 +0.0 +9.2 +9.5 –0.3 –1.2 +0.9 –0.0 May
– 0.2 – 0.0 –26.4 –26.1 – 0.3 + 3.9 – 4.2 – –23.1 –13.1 –9.9 –8.7 –1.2 +0.1 June
– 0.0 + 0.1 +27.3 +17.2 +10.1 + 9.0 + 1.1 – +0.4 –1.3 +1.7 +1.1 +0.6 –0.0 July
+ 0.0 – 0.0 –32.6 –16.4 –16.2 –17.9 + 1.7 –0.0 –4.3 –5.9 +1.6 +3.6 –2.0 –0.0 Aug.
– 0.0 – 0.0 –21.0 –32.3 +11.4 – 2.2 +13.5 – –5.7 +7.1 –12.8 –12.8 +0.0 +0.0 Sep.
+ 0.0 + 0.5 +17.0 +22.8 – 5.8 – 5.6 – 0.2 – +19.6 +0.9 +18.7 +17.3 +1.4 –0.1 Oct.
+ 0.2 – 0.1 –12.9 –18.4 + 5.5 + 4.9 + 0.6 – –8.6 +0.6 –9.2 –9.8 +0.6 –0.0 Nov.
+ 0.3 + 0.3 –77.1 –66.7 –10.4 – 2.3 – 8.2 – –31.3 –29.7 –1.5 –1.8 +0.3 –0.0 Dec.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
30•
IV. Banks
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Short-term lending Medium- and long-term Lending to domestic
non-banks, total
to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
Periodincluding
negotiable
money market
paper, securities,
equalisation
claimsexcluding
negotiable
money market
paper, securities,
equalisation
claims Total TotalLoans
and
billsNegotiable
money
market
paper Total LoansTreasury
bills Total Total
End of year or month *
2013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2017 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
2018 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 – 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.8
2019 3,521.5 3,119.5 260.4 238.8 238.4 0.4 21.6 18.7 2.9 3,261.1 2,866.9
2020 3,647.0 3,245.3 243.3 221.6 221.2 0.4 21.6 18.0 3.6 3,403.8 3,013.0
2021 3,798.1 3,392.7 249.7 232.2 231.9 0.3 17.5 15.2 2.3 3,548.4 3,174.6
2022 4,015.6 3,613.3 296.4 279.8 279.4 0.4 16.7 14.3 2.3 3,719.2 3,359.9
2022 July 3,945.0 3,539.3 291.4 271.8 270.9 0.8 19.6 16.8 2.8 3,653.7 3,293.5
Aug. 3,976.0 3,574.4 305.0 287.3 286.4 0.8 17.7 14.7 3.1 3,671.0 3,314.3
Sep. 3,993.6 3,595.5 311.0 292.8 292.2 0.6 18.2 15.2 3.0 3,682.6 3,329.1
Oct. 4,014.1 3,611.8 308.7 288.9 288.4 0.5 19.9 16.1 3.8 3,705.3 3,347.5
Nov. 4,025.7 3,625.4 310.7 292.9 292.6 0.4 17.7 14.5 3.2 3,715.0 3,359.0
Dec. 4,015.6 3,613.3 296.4 279.8 279.4 0.4 16.7 14.3 2.3 3,719.2 3,359.9
2023 Jan. 4,016.2 3,622.5 303.2 282.5 281.9 0.5 20.7 17.0 3.8 3,713.1 3,360.2
Feb. 4,030.2 3,629.5 297.8 279.9 279.2 0.7 18.0 15.8 2.2 3,732.4 3,371.2
Mar. 4,030.5 3,634.8 305.0 285.1 284.4 0.7 19.9 16.3 3.6 3,725.5 3,369.3
Apr. 4,032.5 3,641.3 304.1 283.3 282.8 0.6 20.8 18.2 2.6 3,728.4 3,374.4
May 4,039.0 3,650.6 299.7 281.0 280.2 0.8 18.7 17.4 1.3 3,739.3 3,388.0
June 4,042.1 3,645.7 300.3 280.5 279.6 0.9 19.8 17.8 2.0 3,741.8 3,388.7
July 4,048.7 3,653.9 299.4 277.4 276.6 0.9 21.9 19.6 2.3 3,749.3 3,395.5
Aug. 4,046.7 3,650.0 289.5 270.8 270.1 0.7 18.6 16.8 1.8 3,757.2 3,398.6
Sep. 4,048.1 3,653.6 297.2 275.5 274.8 0.6 21.7 19.0 2.7 3,751.0 3,395.8
Oct. 4,051.9 3,656.7 293.6 270.9 270.3 0.6 22.7 20.3 2.4 3,758.3 3,401.0
Nov. 4,057.9 3,661.3 291.1 272.0 271.4 0.7 19.0 16.6 2.4 3,766.9 3,404.2
Dec. 4,044.3 3,650.0 279.1 264.2 264.0 0.3 14.8 14.2 0.6 3,765.2 3,401.2
Changes *
2014 + 36.7 + 20.5 – 11.6 – 4.5 – 4.5 – 0.0 – 7.1 – 6.5 – 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 – 1.3 – 0.9 – 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 – 5.2 – 0.3 – 0.4 + 0.1 – 4.9 – 4.8 – 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.8
2017 + 57.0 + 70.2 – 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 – 12.1 – 12.4 + 0.3 + 63.5 + 103.4
2018 + 71.5 + 105.3 + 6.6 + 15.8 + 15.7 + 0.1 – 9.2 – 8.6 – 0.6 + 65.0 + 102.0
2019 + 126.7 + 129.1 + 11.7 + 11.6 + 11.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 3.0 + 3.1 + 115.0 + 132.8
2020 + 123.2 + 123.6 – 19.6 – 19.8 – 19.8 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.7 + 142.8 + 145.6
2021 + 152.2 + 147.8 + 8.8 + 13.8 + 13.8 – 0.1 – 4.9 – 2.8 – 2.1 + 143.4 + 157.9
2022 + 216.7 + 220.0 + 47.6 + 48.5 + 48.5 + 0.0 – 0.9 – 0.9 + 0.0 + 169.1 + 184.8
2022 July + 36.1 + 23.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.1 + 35.8 + 35.6
Aug. + 30.9 + 35.1 + 13.7 + 15.5 + 15.5 + 0.0 – 1.9 – 2.1 + 0.3 + 17.2 + 20.8
Sep. + 16.5 + 20.0 + 4.8 + 4.4 + 4.6 – 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.6 – 0.1 + 11.7 + 14.8
Oct. + 20.7 + 16.6 – 2.0 – 3.6 – 3.5 – 0.1 + 1.6 + 0.8 + 0.8 + 22.7 + 18.5
Nov. + 12.0 + 13.9 + 2.2 + 4.4 + 4.5 – 0.1 – 2.1 – 1.5 – 0.6 + 9.7 + 11.8
Dec. – 9.6 – 11.7 – 13.9 – 12.8 – 12.7 – 0.0 – 1.1 – 0.2 – 0.9 + 4.2 + 1.8
2023 Jan. + 0.6 + 9.2 + 6.7 + 2.6 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 4.1 + 2.6 + 1.4 – 6.1 + 0.3
Feb. + 13.3 + 6.3 – 6.0 – 3.2 – 3.3 + 0.1 – 2.8 – 1.2 – 1.6 + 19.3 + 11.0
Mar. + 0.9 + 6.0 + 7.6 + 5.7 + 5.7 – 0.0 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 1.4 – 6.7 – 1.8
Apr. + 2.1 + 6.5 – 0.9 – 1.7 – 1.7 – 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.9 – 1.1 + 3.0 + 5.1
May + 6.5 + 9.4 – 4.4 – 2.3 – 2.6 + 0.3 – 2.1 – 0.8 – 1.2 + 10.9 + 13.6
June + 4.4 – 3.7 + 1.7 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 2.7 + 0.9
July + 6.6 + 8.3 – 1.0 – 3.1 – 3.1 – 0.0 + 2.1 + 1.9 + 0.2 + 7.5 + 6.9
Aug. – 1.9 – 4.0 – 9.9 – 6.6 – 6.5 – 0.2 – 3.3 – 2.8 – 0.5 + 8.0 + 3.1
Sep. + 1.3 + 3.7 + 7.7 + 4.6 + 4.7 – 0.1 + 3.1 + 2.1 + 0.9 – 6.4 – 2.9
Oct. + 3.7 + 3.0 – 3.5 – 4.6 – 4.5 – 0.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 – 0.3 + 7.2 + 5.2
Nov. + 6.1 + 4.7 – 2.3 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.1 – 3.7 – 3.7 + 0.0 + 8.4 + 3.8
Dec. – 12.5 – 10.2 – 11.0 – 7.8 – 7.4 – 0.4 – 3.2 – 1.3 – 1.8 – 1.6 – 2.8
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims (see also
footnote 2).  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation
claims.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
31•
IV. Banks
lending
prises and households to general government
Loans Loans
TotalMedium-
termLong-
term SecuritiesMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total TotalMedium-
termLong-
termSecur-
ities  1Equal-
isation
claims  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
2,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 – 2.7 2013
2,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 – 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 – 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 – 1.8 2016
2,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 – 1.7 2017
2,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 – 1.4 2018
2,626.4 301.3 2,325.1 240.5 15.7 394.2 235.9 17.2 218.8 158.2 – 1.5 2019
2,771.8 310.5 2,461.4 241.1 22.4 390.8 234.3 15.7 218.6 156.6 – 1.1 2020
2,915.7 314.5 2,601.2 258.9 24.7 373.8 229.9 14.3 215.6 143.9 – 1.0 2021
3,085.9 348.7 2,737.1 274.0 24.6 359.3 233.7 14.1 219.6 125.6 – 1.0 2022
3,022.5 327.7 2,694.9 271.0 24.9 360.2 229.0 13.5 215.5 131.2 – 1.0 2022 July
3,044.6 335.4 2,709.1 269.8 24.9 356.6 228.7 13.5 215.2 127.9 – 1.0 Aug.
3,058.8 339.5 2,719.3 270.2 24.8 353.5 229.3 13.8 215.4 124.3 – 1.0 Sep.
3,077.4 344.8 2,732.7 270.1 24.8 357.8 229.9 13.8 216.1 127.9 – 1.0 Oct.
3,086.6 344.9 2,741.7 272.4 24.8 356.0 231.7 13.9 217.8 124.3 – 1.0 Nov.
3,085.9 348.7 2,737.1 274.0 24.6 359.3 233.7 14.1 219.6 125.6 – 1.0 Dec.
3,090.3 349.9 2,740.4 269.9 24.6 352.9 233.4 13.8 219.5 119.5 – 1.0 2023 Jan.
3,102.0 355.3 2,746.7 269.2 24.5 361.2 232.5 13.7 218.8 128.7 – 1.1 Feb.
3,101.5 354.8 2,746.7 267.8 23.6 356.2 232.6 13.6 219.0 123.6 – 1.0 Mar.
3,107.6 355.6 2,752.0 266.8 23.6 354.0 232.7 13.9 218.8 121.2 – 1.0 Apr.
3,120.7 360.8 2,760.0 267.2 23.7 351.4 232.4 13.6 218.8 119.0 – 1.0 May
3,117.4 360.0 2,757.5 271.3 23.3 353.1 230.9 13.4 217.6 122.2 – 1.0 June
3,125.3 362.1 2,763.3 270.2 23.4 353.8 232.4 13.5 218.9 121.4 – 1.0 July
3,130.4 362.8 2,767.6 268.2 23.4 358.6 232.6 13.8 218.8 126.0 – 1.0 Aug.
3,126.8 359.5 2,767.3 269.0 23.2 355.1 233.0 13.7 219.4 122.1 – 1.0 Sep.
3,131.2 360.7 2,770.5 269.8 23.1 357.3 234.8 13.8 221.0 122.4 – 1.0 Oct.
3,135.5 361.4 2,774.1 268.7 23.0 362.7 237.8 14.1 223.8 124.8 – 1.0 Nov.
3,131.7 361.0 2,770.7 269.5 22.8 364.1 240.1 14.1 226.0 124.0 – 1.0 Dec.
Changes *
+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 +12.5 – 1.8 – 4.1 – 8.5 – 5.1 – 3.4 + 4.3 – – 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 +14.8 – 2.1 – 6.6 – 6.9 – 4.8 – 2.0 + 0.2 – + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 – 0.9 – 30.9 – 7.3 – 4.0 – 3.3 –23.6 – – 0.4 2016
+ 87.6 + 9.4 + 78.2 +15.8 + 0.1 – 39.9 –10.6 – 1.3 – 9.3 –29.4 – – 0.1 2017
+108.7 +19.3 + 89.4 – 6.7 – 0.9 – 37.1 –10.5 – 2.7 – 7.8 –26.6 – – 0.0 2018
+126.0 +18.9 +107.2 + 6.8 – 0.8 – 17.8 – 5.5 – 2.6 – 2.9 –12.3 – + 0.1 2019
+145.0 + 9.4 +135.5 + 0.6 + 6.1 – 2.8 – 1.1 – 1.5 + 0.4 – 1.7 – – 0.4 2020
+140.1 + 5.6 +134.5 +17.8 + 2.3 – 14.6 – 3.3 – 1.3 – 2.0 –11.3 – – 0.0 2021
+169.9 +33.5 +136.4 +14.9 – 0.1 – 15.7 + 2.5 – 0.7 + 3.3 –18.2 – – 0.0 2022
+ 22.5 + 4.4 + 18.1 +13.1 – 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.7 – 0.1 + 0.8 – 0.5 – – 0.0 2022 July
+ 22.0 + 7.7 + 14.3 – 1.2 – 0.0 – 3.6 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.2 – 3.3 – + 0.0 Aug.
+ 14.3 + 4.0 + 10.4 + 0.5 – 0.1 – 3.1 + 0.5 – 0.2 + 0.7 – 3.6 – + 0.0 Sep.
+ 18.6 + 5.3 + 13.4 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 4.2 + 0.6 – 0.0 + 0.6 + 3.6 – – 0.0 Oct.
+ 9.4 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 2.4 + 0.0 – 2.1 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 1.4 – 3.6 – + 0.0 Nov.
+ 0.3 + 4.0 – 3.7 + 1.6 – 0.3 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.9 + 1.4 – – 0.0 Dec.
+ 4.4 + 1.2 + 3.3 – 4.2 + 0.0 – 6.4 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 6.1 – – 0.0 2023 Jan.
+ 11.7 + 5.4 + 6.4 – 0.7 – 0.1 + 8.3 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.7 + 9.2 – + 0.1 Feb.
– 0.4 – 0.5 + 0.0 – 1.4 – 0.3 – 4.8 + 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.3 – 5.1 – – 0.0 Mar.
+ 6.1 + 0.8 + 5.3 – 1.0 + 0.0 – 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 – 0.2 – 2.3 – + 0.0 Apr.
+ 13.2 + 5.2 + 8.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 – 2.7 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 2.3 – – 0.0 May
– 3.2 – 1.3 – 2.0 + 4.1 – 0.3 + 1.8 – 1.5 – 0.2 – 1.2 + 3.2 – – 0.0 June
+ 8.0 + 1.8 + 6.2 – 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 1.3 – 0.8 – – 0.0 July
+ 5.1 + 0.8 + 4.3 – 2.0 + 0.1 + 4.8 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.1 + 4.6 – – 0.0 Aug.
– 3.6 – 3.3 – 0.2 + 0.7 – 0.2 – 3.5 + 0.4 – 0.2 + 0.6 – 3.9 – – 0.0 Sep.
+ 4.4 + 1.1 + 3.2 + 0.8 – 0.1 + 2.1 + 1.8 + 0.2 + 1.6 + 0.3 – – 0.0 Oct.
+ 4.8 + 0.2 + 4.6 – 1.1 – 0.1 + 4.7 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 2.0 + 2.4 – + 0.0 Nov.
– 3.5 – 0.4 – 3.2 + 0.7 – 0.2 + 1.2 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 2.0 – 0.9 – – 0.0 Dec.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
32•
IV. Banks
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
billion €
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios)  1
of which:
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
Period TotalMortgage
loans,
total TotalMortgage
loans
secured
by
residen-
tial real
estateOther
housing
loans Totalof which:
Housing
loansManufac-
turingElectricity,
gas and
water
supply;
refuse
disposal,          
mining
and
quarryingConstruc-
tionWhole-
sale and
retail
trade;
repair of
motor                
vehicles
and
motor-
cyclesAgri-
culture,
forestry,
fishing
and
aqua-
cultureTransport-
ation and
storage;
post and                      
telecom-
munica-
tionsFinancial
intermedi-
ation
(excluding
MFIs) and
insurance   
com-
panies
Lending, total                                                 End of year or quarter *
2021 3,147.5 1,591.4 1,678.2 1,373.0 305.2 1,701.5 477.2 146.1 128.3 98.0 140.4 55.9 55.6 186.3
2022 Q4 3,365.3 1,676.5 1,773.9 1,448.0 325.8 1,852.2 509.1 160.0 137.7 108.8 155.1 56.3 65.2 211.9
2023 Q1 3,385.9 1,687.3 1,779.0 1,457.3 321.7 1,872.4 512.9 162.8 138.1 110.9 157.5 56.1 63.1 222.8
Q2 3,397.0 1,701.4 1,787.6 1,471.4 316.3 1,879.4 517.7 162.6 137.7 112.5 159.2 56.3 61.9 221.5
Q3 3,401.6 1,735.7 1,797.1 1,505.7 291.5 1,878.2 522.3 160.0 134.7 113.3 159.5 56.4 61.3 223.0
Q4 3,395.7 1,740.5 1,801.7 1,512.0 289.7 1,872.8 525.7 154.6 136.1 113.3 160.2 56.0 61.6 218.1
Short-term lending
2021 231.8 – 6.9 – 6.9 202.7 4.4 31.6 9.1 18.0 36.4 3.3 3.9 35.0
2022 Q4 279.4 – 7.4 – 7.4 248.9 5.0 41.6 12.1 20.8 44.7 3.3 3.8 49.8
2023 Q1 284.4 – 7.6 – 7.6 253.6 5.3 43.4 8.1 21.9 46.5 3.4 3.7 54.0
Q2 279.6 – 7.6 – 7.6 248.9 5.4 42.3 7.7 22.6 46.8 3.8 3.6 50.4
Q3 274.8 – 7.5 – 7.5 244.4 5.4 40.4 5.6 22.6 47.2 3.8 3.8 51.3
Q4 264.0 – 7.4 – 7.4 233.9 5.3 37.2 5.1 22.2 46.8 3.5 4.5 47.2
Medium-term lending
2021 314.5 – 40.5 – 40.5 239.5 20.6 28.3 5.4 19.3 20.8 4.3 12.3 52.0
2022 Q4 348.7 – 43.4 – 43.4 275.8 23.5 31.2 6.5 22.2 24.3 4.1 23.0 56.2
2023 Q1 354.8 – 42.8 – 42.8 283.5 23.7 32.5 9.2 22.4 24.8 4.1 21.0 59.3
Q2 360.0 – 42.8 – 42.8 289.3 24.1 34.0 8.0 22.8 26.9 4.1 19.1 61.3
Q3 359.5 – 42.8 – 42.8 289.2 24.5 34.7 5.8 23.0 26.9 4.1 18.2 62.5
Q4 361.0 – 41.9 – 41.9 291.2 24.3 34.0 6.0 23.1 28.2 4.2 18.6 61.3
Long-term lending
2021 2,601.2 1,591.4 1,630.9 1,373.0 257.8 1,259.3 452.2 86.2 113.8 60.8 83.2 48.3 39.4 99.3
2022 Q4 2,737.1 1,676.5 1,723.1 1,448.0 275.1 1,327.5 480.6 87.2 119.0 65.8 86.1 48.9 38.4 105.9
2023 Q1 2,746.7 1,687.3 1,728.6 1,457.3 271.3 1,335.3 483.9 86.9 120.8 66.6 86.1 48.6 38.4 109.5
Q2 2,757.5 1,701.4 1,737.2 1,471.4 265.9 1,341.2 488.2 86.3 122.1 67.1 85.5 48.5 39.2 109.7
Q3 2,767.3 1,735.7 1,746.8 1,505.7 241.2 1,344.7 492.4 85.0 123.3 67.7 85.3 48.5 39.2 109.1
Q4 2,770.7 1,740.5 1,752.5 1,512.0 240.5 1,347.8 496.1 83.4 125.1 68.0 85.2 48.3 38.5 109.7
Lending, total                                                 Change during quarter *
2022 Q4 +16.5 +17.2 +15.4 +14.8 + 0.6 + 8.9 + 5.9 – 3.2 – 9.9 + 1.4 – 2.7 – 0.6 + 0.3 +10.2
2023 Q1 +20.4 +11.3 + 4.8 + 8.6 – 3.8 +19.9 + 3.5 + 2.8 + 0.4 + 2.1 + 2.1 – 0.2 – 2.1 +10.6
Q2 +12.4 +11.5 + 9.1 +11.5 – 2.4 + 8.2 + 5.3 – 0.1 – 0.4 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 0.2 – 0.9 – 0.2
Q3 + 4.7 +10.9 + 9.2 +11.2 – 2.0 – 1.4 + 4.2 – 2.5 – 2.9 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 – 0.6 + 1.3
Q4 – 4.9 + 5.6 + 4.8 + 7.0 – 2.2 – 4.5 + 3.4 – 5.5 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.7 – 0.5 + 0.7 – 4.9
Short-term lending
2022 Q4 –11.8 – – 0.0 – – 0.0 –10.8 + 0.1 – 4.3 –12.3 – 0.3 – 0.5 – 0.3 – 0.3 + 7.8
2023 Q1 + 4.7 – + 0.2 – + 0.2 + 4.7 + 0.3 + 1.8 – 4.0 + 1.1 + 1.9 + 0.2 – 0.1 + 3.9
Q2 – 3.7 – – 0.0 – – 0.0 – 3.6 + 0.1 – 1.1 – 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.0 – 2.4
Q3 – 4.8 – – 0.1 – – 0.1 – 4.7 – 0.0 – 1.9 – 2.1 – 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.9
Q4 –10.6 – – 0.2 – – 0.2 –10.1 – 0.1 – 3.1 – 0.7 – 0.4 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.7 – 4.1
Medium-term lending
2022 Q4 + 9.3 – + 0.1 – + 0.1 +10.0 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.9 – 0.1 + 0.8 + 1.9
2023 Q1 + 6.1 – – 0.5 – – 0.5 + 7.6 + 0.3 + 1.2 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 0.5 – 0.1 – 2.0 + 3.0
Q2 + 4.7 – – 0.0 – – 0.0 + 5.4 + 0.4 + 1.6 – 1.3 + 0.4 + 2.0 – 0.0 – 1.6 + 2.1
Q3 – 0.8 – – 0.2 – – 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.7 – 2.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.9 + 1.1
Q4 + 1.0 – – 0.7 – – 0.7 + 1.7 – 0.3 – 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 – 1.3
Long-term lending
2022 Q4 +19.0 +17.2 +15.3 +14.8 + 0.5 + 9.7 + 5.3 + 0.3 + 1.9 + 1.1 – 3.1 – 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.5
2023 Q1 + 9.6 +11.3 + 5.1 + 8.6 – 3.5 + 7.6 + 2.9 – 0.3 + 1.7 + 0.8 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 3.7
Q2 +11.3 +11.5 + 9.1 +11.5 – 2.4 + 6.4 + 4.8 – 0.6 + 1.3 + 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.1
Q3 +10.3 +10.9 + 9.5 +11.2 – 1.7 + 3.8 + 4.0 – 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.6 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.6
Q4 + 4.7 + 5.6 + 5.7 + 7.0 – 1.3 + 3.9 + 3.8 – 1.6 + 1.8 + 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.3 + 0.6
* Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical breaks have been eliminatedfrom the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
visional; subsequent alterations, which appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
33•
IV. Banks
Lending to employees and other individualsLending to
non-profit institutions
Services sector (including the professions) Memo items: Other lending
of which: of which:
TotalHousing
enterprisesHolding
companiesOther
real
estate
activitiesLending
to self-
employed
persons  2Lending
to craft
enterprises TotalHousing
loans TotalInstalment
loans  3Debit
balances
on wage,
salary
and
pension
accounts Totalof which:
Housing
loans   Period
End of year or quarter *                                   Lending, total
890.8 308.6 63.8 207.9 483.8 48.3 1,429.3 1,196.6 232.7 184.1 6.9 16.7 4.4 2021
957.4 334.0 79.9 218.2 501.7 54.1 1,495.8 1,260.1 235.7 185.9 7.1 17.3 4.6 2022 Q4
961.2 336.3 78.6 220.4 503.4 54.2 1,496.2 1,261.4 234.7 185.5 7.3 17.4 4.7 2023 Q1
967.7 340.4 78.1 220.8 504.3 55.0 1,500.1 1,265.2 234.9 186.0 7.3 17.5 4.7 Q2
970.0 344.0 76.3 222.5 505.0 54.6 1,505.9 1,270.1 235.7 186.9 7.3 17.5 4.7 Q3
973.0 346.8 75.8 223.7 504.9 54.3 1,505.7 1,271.3 234.4 185.6 7.1 17.2 4.7 Q4
Short-term lending
65.5 14.5 13.0 10.0 19.7 3.8 28.6 2.5 26.1 1.4 6.9 0.5 0.0 2021
73.0 16.1 15.6 10.8 20.4 5.0 29.9 2.4 27.5 1.7 7.1 0.6 –2022 Q4
72.5 16.5 14.9 11.6 21.0 5.3 30.2 2.3 27.9 2.1 7.3 0.6 –2023 Q1
71.7 16.5 14.2 11.0 21.0 6.7 30.1 2.2 27.9 2.3 7.3 0.6 – Q2
69.7 16.2 13.2 11.6 20.6 6.5 29.9 2.1 27.8 2.2 7.3 0.6 – Q3
67.4 16.0 12.6 11.3 20.7 5.7 29.5 2.1 27.5 2.2 7.1 0.6 0.0 Q4
Medium-term lending
97.0 23.1 15.2 27.1 30.0 3.3 74.4 19.8 54.6 50.6 – 0.6 0.1 2021
108.2 25.4 20.1 28.4 30.1 6.5 72.3 19.8 52.5 48.0 – 0.6 0.1 2022 Q4
110.3 25.3 21.4 29.0 30.3 6.4 70.8 19.0 51.8 47.3 – 0.5 0.1 2023 Q1
113.1 25.9 22.0 29.5 30.9 6.2 70.1 18.6 51.5 46.9 – 0.6 0.1 Q2
113.9 26.5 20.8 30.9 31.1 6.2 69.7 18.2 51.5 46.9 – 0.6 0.1 Q3
115.9 26.0 21.4 32.2 31.2 6.4 69.4 17.5 51.8 47.1 – 0.4 0.1 Q4
Long-term lending
728.4 271.1 35.6 170.8 434.1 41.3 1,326.3 1,174.3 152.0 132.1 – 15.6 4.3 2021
776.2 292.6 44.2 179.0 451.1 42.6 1,393.5 1,237.9 155.6 136.2 – 16.1 4.6 2022 Q4
778.4 294.6 42.4 179.7 452.1 42.5 1,395.1 1,240.1 155.1 136.1 – 16.3 4.6 2023 Q1
782.8 298.0 41.9 180.3 452.3 42.1 1,399.9 1,244.4 155.5 136.8 – 16.3 4.6 Q2
786.5 301.3 42.3 180.0 453.3 41.9 1,406.3 1,249.8 156.4 137.8 – 16.4 4.6 Q3
789.7 304.8 41.8 180.1 453.0 42.3 1,406.8 1,251.7 155.1 136.3 – 16.2 4.6 Q4
Change during quarter *                                    Lending, total
+13.3 + 4.9 + 3.5 + 2.4 + 2.1 – 0.1 + 7.5 + 9.5 – 2.0 – 1.3 – 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 2022 Q4
+ 4.1 + 2.5 – 1.4 + 2.2 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 1.3 – 0.8 – 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 2023 Q1
+ 6.2 + 4.1 – 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 3.8 + 0.3 + 0.5 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 Q2
+ 2.1 + 3.5 – 1.8 + 1.7 + 0.5 – 0.4 + 6.0 + 5.0 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 Q3
+ 3.4 + 2.7 – 0.4 + 1.3 – 0.4 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 1.4 – 1.4 – 1.3 – 0.3 – 0.3 + 0.0 Q4
Short-term lending
– 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.7 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.8 – 0.0 – 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.0 2022 Q4
– 0.1 + 0.4 – 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.3 – –2023 Q1
– 1.0 + 0.0 – 0.8 – 0.6 – 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.0 – Q2
– 2.3 – 0.3 – 1.0 + 0.5 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 – Q3
– 2.0 – 0.2 – 0.6 – 0.2 + 0.1 – 0.8 – 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.3 + 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.0 Q4
Medium-term lending
+ 4.6 + 0.1 + 2.4 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.7 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.6 – + 0.0 – 0.0 2022 Q4
+ 2.1 – 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.7 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 1.6 – 0.8 – 0.7 – 0.7 – – 0.0 –2023 Q1
+ 2.3 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.7 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.4 – + 0.0 – 0.0 Q2
+ 0.5 + 0.6 – 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.4 – 0.4 + 0.1 – 0.1 – + 0.1 – 0.0 Q3
+ 2.0 – 0.5 + 0.6 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.5 – 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.2 – – 0.2 + 0.0 Q4
Long-term lending
+ 9.3 + 4.6 + 0.5 + 1.9 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 9.1 + 9.9 – 0.9 – 0.7 – + 0.2 + 0.1 2022 Q4
+ 2.1 + 2.2 – 2.0 + 0.8 + 0.9 – 0.1 + 1.9 + 2.1 – 0.2 – 0.1 – + 0.1 + 0.1 2023 Q1
+ 4.9 + 3.4 – 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.6 – 0.1 + 4.8 + 4.3 + 0.5 + 0.7 – + 0.1 + 0.0 Q2
+ 3.9 + 3.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.9 – 0.2 + 6.4 + 5.5 + 0.9 + 1.0 – + 0.0 + 0.0 Q3
+ 3.3 + 3.5 – 0.3 + 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 1.9 – 1.0 – 1.2 – – 0.1 – 0.0 Q4
are not specially marked.  1 Excluding fiduciary loans.  2 Including sole proprietors. 3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
34•
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year  2
PeriodDeposits,
totalSight
deposits Totalfor up
to and
including
1 year Totalfor up
to and
including
2 yearsfor more
than
2 yearsSavings
deposits  3Bank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)Liabilities
arising
from repos
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
2020 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 188.9 594.4 47.9 546.5 560.6 28.3 34.4 14.4 0.1
2021 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 161.0 574.9 49.7 525.2 561.2 24.5 34.2 17.1 1.3
2022 4,162.0 2,720.6 873.5 314.8 558.7 50.5 508.2 533.2 34.6 35.9 18.5 3.9
2023 Jan. 4,199.7 2,722.8 913.5 351.2 562.3 52.1 510.2 522.7 40.6 36.9 18.6 2.1
Feb. 4,197.1 2,687.7 947.9 381.5 566.4 54.2 512.3 516.0 45.5 37.2 18.7 2.9
Mar. 4,167.4 2,639.8 968.6 402.4 566.3 55.7 510.6 507.2 51.7 36.4 18.7 3.3
Apr. 4,167.3 2,632.0 978.5 408.7 569.7 59.4 510.3 498.6 58.3 36.5 18.9 3.0
May 4,172.9 2,623.9 993.0 419.3 573.6 61.7 511.9 490.6 65.4 36.6 20.4 4.1
June 4,176.3 2,600.9 1,020.0 445.4 574.6 64.4 510.2 483.3 72.1 36.5 20.3 2.8
July 4,180.2 2,582.2 1,042.9 468.5 574.4 65.8 508.6 475.9 79.1 36.7 19.9 3.5
Aug. 4,188.4 2,568.4 1,061.7 490.2 571.6 67.3 504.3 467.5 90.7 36.9 19.9 4.7
Sep. 4,189.3 2,558.0 1,072.5 497.7 574.8 71.5 503.3 461.8 97.0 37.1 19.9 6.5
Oct. 4,198.0 2,544.5 1,086.5 510.9 575.6 74.6 501.0 455.4 111.6 37.3 19.9 6.3
Nov. 4,217.3 2,552.9 1,085.6 506.9 578.6 76.7 501.9 448.3 130.5 37.6 20.8 6.4
Dec. 4,231.0 2,542.8 1,100.1 514.7 585.4 80.5 504.9 445.9 142.2 50.1 20.3 2.9
Changes *
2021 + 95.3 +144.3 – 46.2 – 27.3 –18.9 + 1.5 –20.5 + 0.7 – 3.5 – 0.2 + 2.7 + 1.2
2022 +191.8 + 65.8 +143.4 +152.5 – 9.1 + 0.6 – 9.7 –27.5 +10.1 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 2.6
2023 Jan. + 37.6 – 2.9 + 40.0 + 36.4 + 3.6 + 1.6 + 2.0 – 5.5 + 6.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 – 1.8
Feb. – 2.5 – 35.0 + 34.4 + 30.3 + 4.1 + 2.1 + 2.0 – 6.7 + 4.8 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.8
Mar. – 29.6 – 47.3 + 20.2 + 20.3 – 0.1 + 1.5 – 1.6 – 8.7 + 6.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.3
Apr. – 0.1 – 7.9 + 9.8 + 6.4 + 3.4 + 3.7 – 0.3 – 8.6 + 6.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.2
May + 5.6 – 7.9 + 14.5 + 10.5 + 3.9 + 2.3 + 1.6 – 8.0 + 7.1 + 0.1 + 1.6 + 1.1
June + 2.3 – 23.0 + 26.0 + 25.4 + 0.7 + 2.4 – 1.7 – 7.3 + 6.7 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 1.3
July + 3.8 – 18.7 + 22.8 + 23.1 – 0.3 + 1.4 – 1.7 – 7.3 + 7.0 + 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.7
Aug. + 8.2 – 13.2 + 21.3 + 21.3 + 0.0 + 1.9 – 1.8 – 8.5 + 8.5 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.2
Sep. + 0.9 – 10.5 + 10.7 + 8.0 + 2.7 + 3.9 – 1.2 – 5.7 + 6.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.8
Oct. + 8.7 – 13.4 + 14.0 + 13.2 + 0.8 + 3.1 – 2.3 – 6.4 +14.6 + 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.2
Nov. + 19.3 + 8.5 – 1.0 – 4.1 + 3.1 + 2.1 + 0.9 – 7.1 +18.8 + 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.2
Dec. + 22.4 – 0.7 + 13.7 + 7.7 + 6.0 + 4.0 + 2.0 – 2.5 +11.8 + 1.2 – 0.4 – 3.5
Domestic government End of year or month *
2020 229.5 80.1 143.0 59.6 83.5 20.9 62.6 2.7 3.7 25.4 2.1 –
2021 210.1 82.4 121.9 42.0 79.9 23.8 56.1 2.5 3.3 25.8 2.0 1.0
2022 279.8 82.5 191.6 106.8 84.9 23.1 61.7 2.0 3.7 27.3 1.9 2.4
2023 Jan. 299.4 94.5 199.3 114.4 84.9 23.1 61.8 1.8 3.8 27.5 1.9 0.3
Feb. 317.8 101.4 211.0 123.3 87.6 23.9 63.8 1.7 3.8 27.5 1.9 1.3
Mar. 308.9 92.6 211.0 123.9 87.1 23.4 63.7 1.6 3.8 26.8 1.9 1.1
Apr. 295.1 85.4 204.4 116.3 88.1 24.7 63.4 1.5 3.8 26.8 1.9 1.4
May 300.1 92.2 202.7 115.0 87.7 24.3 63.4 1.3 3.9 26.8 1.9 1.7
June 308.1 95.9 207.0 119.2 87.7 24.2 63.5 1.2 4.0 26.6 1.8 0.5
July 298.3 85.7 207.5 121.1 86.4 23.0 63.4 1.1 4.0 26.7 1.8 0.8
Aug. 305.6 95.1 205.4 119.3 86.1 22.8 63.3 1.0 4.1 26.6 1.9 2.2
Sep. 304.9 94.2 205.6 119.5 86.2 23.9 62.2 0.9 4.2 26.4 1.8 3.8
Oct. 291.0 92.3 193.5 108.0 85.6 23.5 62.0 0.9 4.2 26.2 1.8 2.9
Nov. 285.2 92.5 187.5 103.7 83.8 22.1 61.7 0.9 4.4 26.0 1.8 2.2
Dec. 286.9 91.2 190.5 105.6 84.9 23.3 61.6 0.9 4.4 26.6 1.4 0.2
Changes *
2021 – 17.9 + 3.4 – 20.8 – 17.7 – 3.0 + 2.9 – 6.0 – 0.2 – 0.4 + 0.4 – 0.0 + 1.0
2022 + 69.1 + 0.2 + 69.2 + 64.7 + 4.5 – 0.9 + 5.4 – 0.6 + 0.3 + 1.5 – 0.1 + 1.4
2023 Jan. + 19.7 + 11.9 + 7.7 + 7.6 + 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 2.1
Feb. + 18.3 + 6.8 + 11.6 + 8.9 + 2.7 + 0.8 + 1.9 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 1.1
Mar. – 8.9 – 8.8 – 0.1 + 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.5 – 0.2 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.2
Apr. – 14.1 – 7.1 – 6.9 – 7.9 + 1.0 + 1.3 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.2
May + 5.0 + 6.6 – 1.6 – 1.3 – 0.4 – 0.4 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.4
June + 8.0 + 3.8 + 4.2 + 4.2 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 1.3
July – 9.8 – 10.2 + 0.5 + 1.8 – 1.3 – 1.2 – 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 – + 0.4
Aug. + 7.3 + 9.3 – 2.1 – 1.8 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 1.4
Sep. – 0.7 – 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 1.2 – 1.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 1.6
Oct. – 14.0 – 1.9 – 12.2 – 11.5 – 0.6 – 0.4 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.9
Nov. – 5.8 + 0.2 – 6.2 – 4.4 – 1.8 – 1.4 – 0.4 – 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.7
Dec. + 1.7 – 1.3 + 2.9 + 1.9 + 1.1 + 1.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.7 – 0.4 – 2.0
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt securities.
2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  3 Excluding
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
35•
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont´d)
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year  2
PeriodDeposits,
totalSight
deposits Totalfor up
to and
including
1 year Totalfor up
to and
including
2 yearsfor more
than
2 yearsSavings
deposits  3Bank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)Liabilities
arising
from repos
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month *
2020 3,655.7 2,432.9 640.3 129.3 511.0 27.0 483.9 557.9 24.6 9.0 12.3 0.1
2021 3,766.2 2,572.2 614.1 119.0 495.0 25.9 469.2 558.7 21.2 8.4 15.1 0.3
2022 3,882.2 2,638.1 681.9 208.0 473.9 27.4 446.5 531.2 31.0 8.6 16.6 1.5
2023 Jan. 3,900.2 2,628.3 714.2 236.8 477.4 29.0 448.4 520.9 36.8 9.4 16.7 1.9
Feb. 3,879.3 2,586.4 737.0 258.2 478.8 30.3 448.5 514.3 41.7 9.7 16.8 1.6
Mar. 3,858.5 2,547.3 757.6 278.4 479.2 32.3 446.9 505.7 47.9 9.7 16.9 2.2
Apr. 3,872.2 2,546.5 774.1 292.5 481.6 34.7 446.9 497.1 54.5 9.7 17.0 1.7
May 3,872.8 2,531.8 790.2 304.3 485.9 37.4 448.5 489.2 61.5 9.8 18.5 2.4
June 3,868.2 2,505.0 813.1 326.1 486.9 40.2 446.7 482.0 68.1 9.9 18.5 2.3
July 3,881.9 2,496.5 835.4 347.4 488.0 42.8 445.2 474.9 75.1 10.0 18.0 2.7
Aug. 3,882.8 2,473.4 856.4 370.9 485.5 44.5 441.0 466.5 86.6 10.3 18.0 2.4
Sep. 3,884.4 2,463.8 866.9 378.3 488.6 47.5 441.1 460.9 92.9 10.7 18.1 2.7
Oct. 3,907.1 2,452.2 892.9 402.9 490.0 51.0 439.0 454.5 107.4 11.2 18.1 3.4
Nov. 3,932.1 2,460.5 898.0 403.2 494.8 54.5 440.3 447.5 126.1 11.6 19.0 4.2
Dec. 3,944.0 2,451.6 909.6 409.1 500.5 57.2 443.3 445.0 137.9 23.5 19.0 2.7
Changes *
2021 +113.2 +140.9 – 25.5 – 9.6 –15.9 – 1.4 –14.5 + 0.9 – 3.1 – 0.6 + 2.8 + 0.2
2022 +122.7 + 65.6 + 74.2 + 87.8 –13.6 + 1.4 –15.1 –27.0 + 9.8 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.3
2023 Jan. + 17.9 – 14.9 + 32.3 + 28.7 + 3.6 + 1.7 + 1.9 – 5.3 + 5.8 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.3
Feb. – 20.8 – 41.9 + 22.8 + 21.4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.1 – 6.6 + 4.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 – 0.3
Mar. – 20.7 – 38.5 + 20.3 + 19.7 + 0.6 + 2.0 – 1.4 – 8.6 + 6.2 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.5
Apr. + 14.0 – 0.7 + 16.7 + 14.3 + 2.4 + 2.4 – 0.0 – 8.5 + 6.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.5
May + 0.6 – 14.6 + 16.1 + 11.8 + 4.3 + 2.7 + 1.6 – 7.9 + 7.1 + 0.0 + 1.6 + 0.7
June – 5.6 – 26.8 + 21.8 + 21.1 + 0.7 + 2.4 – 1.8 – 7.2 + 6.6 + 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1
July + 13.7 – 8.5 + 22.3 + 21.3 + 1.0 + 2.6 – 1.6 – 7.2 + 7.0 + 0.1 – 0.5 + 0.3
Aug. + 0.9 – 22.5 + 23.4 + 23.1 + 0.4 + 2.1 – 1.8 – 8.4 + 8.4 + 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.3
Sep. + 1.6 – 9.6 + 10.5 + 7.9 + 2.6 + 2.7 – 0.1 – 5.6 + 6.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2
Oct. + 22.7 – 11.6 + 26.1 + 24.7 + 1.5 + 3.5 – 2.0 – 6.4 +14.5 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.7
Nov. + 25.1 + 8.3 + 5.2 + 0.4 + 4.8 + 3.5 + 1.3 – 7.0 +18.7 + 0.5 + 0.9 + 0.9
Dec. + 20.7 + 0.6 + 10.8 + 5.9 + 4.9 + 2.8 + 2.1 – 2.4 +11.8 + 0.5 + 0.0 – 1.5
of which: Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2020 1,116.1 719.1 381.7 89.2 292.5 15.0 277.5 5.8 9.4 2.3 9.7 0.1
2021 1,142.7 765.1 364.3 87.4 276.9 15.8 261.1 5.3 8.0 2.3 12.2 0.3
2022 1,193.5 783.4 397.1 140.8 256.3 16.8 239.5 4.4 8.6 1.9 13.5 1.5
2023 Jan. 1,220.2 792.5 414.7 156.8 257.9 17.1 240.8 4.3 8.7 2.0 13.5 1.9
Feb. 1,199.2 761.5 424.4 166.8 257.6 17.0 240.6 4.3 9.1 2.0 13.6 1.6
Mar. 1,192.4 749.3 429.7 174.1 255.5 16.8 238.8 4.1 9.3 1.9 13.6 2.2
Apr. 1,190.6 743.1 433.9 178.0 255.9 17.4 238.6 4.0 9.6 2.0 13.7 1.7
May 1,189.3 742.5 433.2 175.7 257.5 17.9 239.6 3.9 9.7 2.0 15.2 2.4
June 1,181.8 726.7 441.4 185.1 256.2 18.3 237.9 3.8 9.9 2.0 15.1 2.3
July 1,189.1 727.3 447.9 192.7 255.3 18.6 236.7 3.7 10.1 2.1 14.6 2.7
Aug. 1,189.2 719.9 452.0 202.1 249.9 18.0 231.9 3.7 13.6 2.2 14.6 2.4
Sep. 1,187.8 719.1 451.5 200.9 250.6 18.7 231.9 3.6 13.6 2.2 14.6 2.7
Oct. 1,209.6 727.6 464.5 215.8 248.7 19.2 229.5 3.5 14.0 2.3 14.6 3.4
Nov. 1,213.9 738.9 457.4 208.5 248.9 19.0 229.8 3.5 14.2 2.3 15.5 4.2
Dec. 1,196.5 724.9 453.9 204.3 249.6 19.0 230.6 3.3 14.4 2.5 15.5 2.7
Changes *
2021 + 28.5 + 47.1 – 16.8 – 1.2 –15.7 + 0.5 –16.2 – 0.5 – 1.3 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 0.2
2022 + 56.2 + 17.7 + 38.8 + 52.1 –13.3 + 1.0 –14.3 – 0.9 + 0.6 – 0.5 + 1.0 + 1.3
2023 Jan. + 26.5 + 9.0 + 17.4 + 15.9 + 1.5 + 0.3 + 1.3 – 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.3
Feb. – 21.0 – 31.0 + 9.7 + 10.0 – 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.4 – 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.3
Mar. – 6.6 – 11.8 + 5.1 + 6.9 – 1.8 – 0.2 – 1.6 – 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.5
Apr. – 1.6 – 6.2 + 4.5 + 4.1 + 0.4 + 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.5
May – 1.2 – 0.5 – 0.7 – 2.3 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 1.1 – 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.5 + 0.7
June – 8.5 – 15.9 + 7.3 + 8.9 – 1.6 + 0.1 – 1.7 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1
July + 7.2 + 0.6 + 6.5 + 7.5 – 1.1 + 0.3 – 1.4 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.5 + 0.3
Aug. + 0.1 – 6.8 + 6.6 + 9.1 – 2.5 – 0.3 – 2.2 – 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.3
Sep. – 1.3 – 0.7 – 0.5 – 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.5 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2
Oct. + 21.8 + 8.5 + 13.0 + 14.9 – 1.9 + 0.5 – 2.4 – 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.7
Nov. + 4.4 + 11.2 – 7.0 – 7.2 + 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.4 – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.9
Dec. – 8.7 – 4.4 – 4.3 – 4.2 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 1.5
4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
36•
IV. Banks
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2
by creditor group by creditor group
Domestic households Domestic households
PeriodDeposits of
domestic
households
and
non-profit
institutions,
total Total TotalSelf-
employed
persons EmployeesOther
individualsDomestic
non-profit
institu-
tions Total TotalSelf-
employed
persons EmployeesOther
individuals
End of year or month *
2020 2,539.5 1,713.8 1,672.7 291.1 1,215.4 166.2 41.1 258.6 245.1 19.3 190.5 35.2
2021 2,623.6 1,807.1 1,762.4 308.6 1,288.4 165.4 44.7 249.8 237.8 18.2 185.6 33.9
2022 2,688.7 1,854.7 1,809.9 307.3 1,342.5 160.1 44.8 284.8 268.7 31.2 200.5 37.1
2023 July 2,692.8 1,769.2 1,728.2 285.8 1,293.2 149.1 41.0 387.5 367.2 56.1 267.2 43.9
Aug. 2,693.7 1,753.5 1,712.7 283.5 1,282.3 146.9 40.8 404.4 383.5 59.5 278.8 45.1
Sep. 2,696.6 1,744.6 1,703.7 275.8 1,280.8 147.1 40.9 415.3 394.0 61.2 286.9 46.0
Oct. 2,697.4 1,724.6 1,683.9 276.4 1,263.0 144.5 40.6 428.5 407.4 63.5 296.9 47.0
Nov. 2,718.2 1,721.6 1,681.1 273.3 1,264.5 143.3 40.5 440.6 420.1 64.9 307.4 47.8
Dec. 2,747.6 1,726.6 1,685.3 270.9 1,271.0 143.4 41.3 455.7 434.0 67.6 317.3 49.2
Changes *
2021 + 84.7 +93.8 +90.3 +17.3 +73.7 – 0.6 + 3.5 – 8.6 – 7.2 – 1.1 – 4.7 –1.3
2022 + 66.5 +48.0 +47.8 – 1.5 +54.1 – 4.7 + 0.1 +35.4 +31.4 +12.9 +17.2 +1.2
2023 July + 6.5 – 9.1 – 7.8 + 3.4 – 9.3 – 1.9 – 1.2 +15.8 +15.2 + 4.0 +10.4 +0.9
Aug. + 0.8 –15.7 –15.4 – 2.3 –11.0 – 2.2 – 0.3 +16.8 +16.3 + 3.4 +11.6 +1.2
Sep. + 2.9 – 8.9 – 9.1 – 7.7 – 1.5 + 0.2 + 0.2 +11.0 +10.6 + 1.7 + 8.0 +0.9
Oct. + 0.9 –20.1 –19.8 + 0.6 –17.8 – 2.5 – 0.3 +13.1 +13.4 + 2.3 +10.1 +1.0
Nov. + 20.7 – 2.9 – 2.8 – 3.0 + 1.4 – 1.2 – 0.2 +12.1 +12.7 + 1.4 +10.4 +0.8
Dec. + 29.4 + 5.0 + 4.2 – 2.4 + 6.5 + 0.1 + 0.9 +15.0 +13.9 + 2.6 + 9.9 +1.3
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional.Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
marked.  1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group *
€ billion
Deposits
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
PeriodDomestic
government,
total TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans
End of year or month *
2020 229.5 48.6 4.8 7.2 36.5 0.0 11.3 46.5 21.2 11.4 13.2 0.7 14.1
2021 210.1 43.5 4.2 3.2 36.0 0.1 11.7 47.4 21.7 13.8 11.3 0.6 14.1
2022 279.8 66.8 7.9 24.2 34.6 0.1 11.4 53.8 17.1 25.2 10.9 0.5 15.9
2023 July 298.3 61.5 11.6 13.5 36.3 0.0 11.1 68.5 21.6 35.9 10.7 0.4 15.5
Aug. 305.6 61.5 11.8 13.5 36.2 0.0 11.2 65.2 22.1 32.1 10.6 0.4 15.4
Sep. 304.9 60.0 11.1 13.7 35.1 0.0 11.1 72.0 25.0 36.0 10.6 0.4 15.2
Oct. 291.0 59.7 14.6 10.0 35.1 0.0 11.1 62.5 20.8 30.7 10.6 0.4 15.0
Nov. 285.2 55.1 12.7 7.4 34.9 0.0 11.3 51.2 18.7 21.6 10.4 0.4 14.7
Dec. 286.9 52.0 9.8 6.7 35.5 0.0 11.6 51.9 19.7 21.9 9.9 0.4 15.1
Changes *
2021 –17.9 –5.0 –0.5 –4.1 –0.4 +0.0 +0.3 +1.0 +0.6 +2.3 –1.8 –0.1 +0.0
2022 +69.1 +23.0 +3.5 +20.9 –1.4 –0.0 –0.3 +6.4 –4.6 +11.3 –0.3 –0.1 +1.8
2023 July – 9.8 –2.5 –2.1 –0.2 –0.1 – +0.0 –1.4 –2.3 +1.0 –0.1 –0.0 +0.0
Aug. + 7.3 –0.0 +0.2 –0.1 –0.2 +0.0 +0.0 –3.3 +0.6 –3.8 –0.1 +0.0 –0.1
Sep. – 0.7 –1.5 –0.7 +0.3 –1.1 –0.0 –0.0 +6.8 +2.9 +3.9 – –0.0 –0.2
Oct. –14.0 –0.3 +3.5 –3.8 –0.0 – –0.0 –9.4 –4.2 –5.3 +0.1 –0.0 –0.2
Nov. – 5.8 –4.6 –1.9 –2.5 –0.2 +0.0 +0.1 –11.5 –2.0 –9.3 –0.2 +0.0 –0.3
Dec. + 1.7 –3.1 –2.9 –0.8 +0.6 +0.0 +0.3 +0.8 +1.1 +0.3 –0.5 –0.0 +0.4
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, East German Railways and Federal
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and DeutscheTelekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises ”.
Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date
are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
37•
IV. Banks
Savings deposits  3 Memo item:
by maturity
more than 1 year  2
of which:
Domestic
non-profit
institu-
tionsup to and
including
1 year Totalup to and
including
2 yearsmore than
2 years TotalDomestic
householdsDomestic
non-profit
institu-
tionsBank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)  5Liabilities
arising
from repos Period
End of year or month *
13.5 40.1 218.5 12.0 206.5 552.0 545.7 6.3 15.1 6.7 2.7 –2020
12.0 31.7 218.1 10.1 208.0 553.4 547.2 6.2 13.2 6.1 2.8 –2021
16.0 67.2 217.5 10.6 206.9 526.8 521.8 5.1 22.4 6.8 3.1 –2022
20.3 154.8 232.7 24.1 208.6 471.1 467.1 4.0 65.0 7.9 3.4 –2023 July
20.9 168.7 235.6 26.6 209.0 462.8 458.9 3.9 73.0 8.2 3.4 – Aug.
21.3 177.3 238.0 28.9 209.1 457.3 453.5 3.8 79.3 8.5 3.4 – Sep.
21.0 187.1 241.3 31.8 209.5 451.0 447.3 3.7 93.4 8.9 3.5 – Oct.
20.5 194.6 245.9 35.5 210.4 444.0 440.5 3.5 111.9 9.3 3.5 – Nov.
21.6 204.7 251.0 38.2 212.7 441.8 438.4 3.4 123.5 21.0 3.5 – Dec.
Changes *
– 1.4 – 8.4 – 0.2 –1.9 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 1.5 –0.1 – 1.9 –0.6 + 0.2 –2021
+ 4.0 + 35.7 – 0.3 +0.5 – 0.8 –26.1 –25.0 –1.1 + 9.2 +0.7 + 0.3 –2022
+ 0.6 + 13.8 + 2.1 +2.3 – 0.2 – 7.1 – 6.9 –0.2 + 6.8 +0.1 + 0.0 –2023 July
+ 0.6 + 14.0 + 2.9 +2.5 + 0.4 – 8.3 – 8.2 –0.1 + 8.0 +0.3 + 0.0 – Aug.
+ 0.4 + 8.6 + 2.4 +2.3 + 0.2 – 5.5 – 5.4 –0.1 + 6.3 +0.3 + 0.0 – Sep.
– 0.3 + 9.8 + 3.4 +3.0 + 0.4 – 6.3 – 6.2 –0.1 +14.1 +0.4 + 0.0 – Oct.
– 0.5 + 7.5 + 4.6 +3.7 + 0.9 – 7.0 – 6.8 –0.2 +18.5 +0.4 + 0.1 – Nov.
+ 1.2 + 10.0 + 5.0 +2.8 + 2.3 – 2.3 – 2.2 –0.1 +11.6 +0.3 + 0.0 – Dec.
registered debt securities.  2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Table IV.12).  3 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see alsofootnote 2).  4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
5 Included in time deposits.
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2,4Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
68.5 43.2 8.0 12.4 4.9 0.0 66.0 10.9 32.9 21.4 0.8 –2020
70.9 48.5 6.0 12.0 4.4 0.0 48.3 8.0 19.0 20.5 0.8 –2021
80.0 49.2 12.5 13.8 4.4 0.0 79.2 8.3 44.9 25.5 0.6 –2022
70.8 34.3 18.5 14.2 3.9 0.0 97.4 18.2 53.2 25.3 0.7 –2023 July
78.9 40.8 20.1 14.2 3.8 0.0 100.0 20.4 53.7 25.1 0.9 – Aug.
75.0 37.4 19.7 14.2 3.7 0.0 97.9 20.7 50.0 26.3 0.9 – Sep.
72.8 35.9 19.2 14.0 3.8 0.0 95.9 21.0 48.2 25.8 0.9 – Oct.
79.5 42.1 19.5 14.1 3.8 0.0 99.5 18.9 55.2 24.4 1.0 – Nov.
83.3 45.6 19.8 14.1 3.8 0.0 99.6 16.1 57.2 25.3 1.0 – Dec.
Changes *
+2.8 +5.6 – 2.0 –0.2 – 0.5 – –16.8 –2.2 –13.9 –0.6 + 0.1 –2021
+10.2 +0.9 + 7.9 +1.3 + 0.1 – +29.6 +0.3 +24.5 +4.9 – 0.2 –2022
–4.3 –4.0 – 0.2 +0.1 – 0.1 – – 1.6 –1.7 + 1.3 –1.2 – 0.0 –2023 July
+8.1 +6.5 + 1.6 +0.0 – 0.0 – + 2.6 +2.1 + 0.5 –0.1 + 0.1 – Aug.
–3.9 –3.4 – 0.4 –0.0 – 0.1 – – 2.1 +0.3 – 3.6 +1.2 + 0.0 – Sep.
–2.2 –1.5 – 0.6 –0.2 + 0.0 – – 2.0 +0.3 – 1.9 –0.5 + 0.0 – Oct.
+6.7 +6.3 + 0.3 +0.1 + 0.0 – + 3.6 –2.2 + 7.1 –1.4 + 0.1 – Nov.
+3.8 +3.3 + 0.3 +0.1 + 0.0 – + 0.1 –2.8 + 2.0 +0.9 + 0.0 – Dec.
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Federal Railways Fund,
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund,
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund.  2 Including liabilities arising fromnon-negotiable bearer debt securities.  3 Including deposits under savings and loan
contracts.  4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
38•
IV. Banks
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at 3 months'
noticeat more than 3
months' notice
Period Total Total Totalof which:
Special
savings
facilities  2 Totalof which:
Special
savings
facilities  2 Totalof which:
At 3
months'
noticeMemo
item:
Interest
credited
on
savings
depositsnon-banks,
total Totalof which:
With
maturities
of more
than
2 yearsforeign
non-banks
End of year or month *
2020 566.8 560.6 533.3 288.0 27.3 18.0 6.3 5.7 1.8 30.2 28.3 22.1 1.9
2021 567.1 561.2 537.1 269.0 24.1 14.8 5.9 5.4 1.5 24.7 24.5 19.5 0.2
2022 538.5 533.2 510.3 254.2 22.9 14.2 5.3 4.8 1.4 34.9 34.6 20.8 0.2
2023 Aug. 472.2 467.5 428.8 198.2 38.7 30.9 4.7 4.1 0.1 91.4 90.7 29.6 0.6
Sep. 466.5 461.8 420.2 195.2 41.6 33.9 4.7 4.0 0.1 97.8 97.0 30.3 0.7
Oct. 460.1 455.4 410.8 191.6 44.6 37.0 4.7 3.9 0.1 112.4 111.6 31.7 0.8
Nov. 452.9 448.3 400.3 188.8 48.1 40.5 4.6 3.8 0.1 131.3 130.5 33.8 0.9
Dec. 450.5 445.9 395.3 187.1 50.6 43.0 4.6 3.8 1.5 143.2 142.2 35.5 1.0
Changes *
2021 +0.3 +0.7 +3.9 –18.5 –3.2 –3.2 –0.4 –0.3 . –5.2 –3.5 –2.3 –1.7
2022 –28.1 –27.5 –26.4 –14.6 –1.2 –0.6 –0.6 –0.6 . +10.2 +10.1 +1.3 +0.1
2023 Aug. –8.5 –8.5 –11.2 –4.5 +2.7 +2.8 –0.0 –0.1 . +8.6 +8.5 +1.0 +0.1
Sep. –5.7 –5.7 –8.6 –3.0 +2.9 +3.0 –0.0 –0.1 . +6.4 +6.3 +0.6 +0.1
Oct. –6.4 –6.4 –9.4 –3.7 +3.0 +3.1 –0.0 –0.1 . +14.7 +14.6 +1.4 +0.1
Nov. –7.1 –7.1 –10.5 –2.7 +3.4 +3.5 –0.1 –0.1 . +18.9 +18.8 +2.1 +0.1
Dec. –2.5 –2.5 –5.0 –1.7 +2.5 +2.5 –0.0 –0.1 . +11.9 +11.8 +1.8 +0.1
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified as timedeposits.  2 Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or
basic rate of interest.  3 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
securities.
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper
of which:
with maturities ofNon-negotiable
bearer debt
securities and
money market
paper  6 Subordinated
up to
and including 1 yearmore than 1 year up to
and including 2 years
Period TotalFloating
rate
bonds  1Zero
coupon
bonds  1,2Foreign
currency
bonds  3,4Certifi-
cates
of
deposit Totalof which:
without
a nominal
guarantee  5Totalof which:
without
a nominal
guarantee  5more
than
2 years Totalof which:
with
maturities
of more
than
2 yearsnegotiable
debt
securitiesnon-
negotiable
debt
securities
End of year or month *
2020 1,119.0 117.1 12.7 313.6 89.4 94.3 1.5 23.8 3.1 1,000.9 1.1 0.9 34.8 0.4
2021 1,173.6 106.8 13.5 331.4 98.7 106.8 1.9 18.0 4.5 1,048.8 0.9 0.7 34.6 0.1
2022 1,231.5 92.8 15.0 307.8 88.6 98.6 1.4 26.6 3.4 1,106.4 0.8 0.7 37.8 0.1
2023 Aug. 1,308.5 82.6 15.4 298.3 98.5 121.4 1.6 37.4 3.5 1,149.7 0.5 0.5 38.2 0.1
Sep. 1,314.3 82.7 14.4 310.5 90.8 114.0 1.5 39.5 3.5 1,160.9 0.5 0.5 37.2 0.1
Oct. 1,313.8 83.4 16.2 304.0 78.7 104.1 1.6 43.8 3.5 1,165.9 0.0 0.0 37.8 0.1
Nov. 1,322.3 88.4 16.0 312.6 89.7 114.2 1.6 42.9 3.6 1,165.2 0.0 0.0 37.5 0.1
Dec. 1,327.5 85.8 15.7 312.6 101.2 122.9 1.3 43.7 3.4 1,160.9 0.0 0.0 37.5 0.1
Changes *
2021 +54.0 –10.3 +0.8 +17.6 +9.4 +12.6 + 0.4 –5.9 +1.3 +47.3 +0.4 +0.3 –0.2 –0.3
2022 +59.1 –12.7 +1.1 –23.6 –9.9 –8.3 – 0.5 +8.5 –1.1 +58.9 –0.1 +0.1 +3.5 –
2023 Aug. +11.5 –1.4 –0.4 –0.3 +7.4 +8.7 + 0.1 +0.7 +0.1 +2.2 +0.0 +0.0 +0.0 –
Sep. + 5.9 +0.1 –1.0 +12.2 –7.6 –7.5 – 0.0 +2.1 –0.0 +11.2 +0.0 +0.0 –1.0 –
Oct. – 1.0 +0.7 +1.3 –7.0 –12.2 –9.9 + 0.0 +4.3 +0.1 +4.6 +0.0 –0.0 +0.6 –
Nov. + 8.5 +5.0 –0.2 +8.6 +11.1 +10.1 + 0.0 –0.9 +0.0 –0.7 – – –0.3 –
Dec. + 5.2 –2.7 –0.4 +0.1 +11.5 +8.7 – 0.3 +0.8 –0.1 –4.3 –0.0 –0.0 +0.0 –
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Including debt securities denominated in foreign currencies.  2 Issue value when
floated.  3 Including floating rate notes and zero coupon bonds denominated in foreigncurrencies.  4 Bonds denominated in non-euro area currencies.  5 Negotiable bearer debt
securities and money market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%.
6 Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see
also Table IV.10, footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
39•
IV. Banks
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany *
Interim statements
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks
(MFIs)  6Deposits of non-
banks (non-MFIs)
Building loans
End of
year/monthNum-
ber
of
associ-
ationsBalance
sheet
total  1Credit
bal-
ances
and
loans
(ex-
cluding
building
loans)  2Building
loans  3Bank
debt
secur-
ities  4Loans
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsInterim
and
bridging
loansOther
building
loansSecur-
ities (in-
cluding
Treasury
bills
and
Treasury
discount
paper)  5Deposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsSight
and time
depositsDeposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsSight and
time de-
posits  7Bearer
debt
secur-
ities
out-
stand-
ingCapital
(includ-
ing pub-
lished
re-
serves)  8Memo
item:
New
con-
tracts
entered
into in
year or
month  9
All building and loan associations
2022 18 259.7 30.6 0.0 15.4 11.1 135.0 40.5 22.9 2.5 36.1 185.3 9.3 5.2 12.3 91.3
2023 Oct. 16 258.4 25.3 0.1 15.8 14.9 134.9 41.2 22.0 1.3 36.0 182.9 10.3 6.1 13.0 7.6
Nov. 15 258.8 25.4 0.1 15.7 15.3 134.9 41.3 21.9 1.2 36.2 182.4 10.5 6.6 13.0 7.4
Dec. 15 259.5 25.6 0.1 15.9 15.7 135.0 41.3 21.8 1.2 36.8 183.2 10.7 6.6 13.0 7.7
Private building and Ioan associations
2023 Oct. 9 181.4 11.2 0.1 8.6 10.2 104.5 35.1 8.9 0.5 32.6 117.6 10.0 6.1 8.9 5.1
Nov. 9 181.9 11.3 0.1 8.6 10.4 104.5 35.2 8.9 0.5 32.9 117.2 10.2 6.6 8.9 5.0
Dec. 9 182.6 11.6 0.1 8.8 10.6 104.7 35.2 8.9 0.4 33.5 117.7 10.4 6.6 8.9 5.1
Public building and Ioan associations
2023 Oct. 7 77.1 14.2 0.0 7.2 4.7 30.3 6.1 13.1 0.7 3.4 65.3 0.3 – 4.1 2.5
Nov. 6 76.9 14.1 0.0 7.1 4.9 30.3 6.1 13.0 0.7 3.3 65.2 0.3 – 4.1 2.5
Dec. 6 76.9 14.0 0.0 7.1 5.1 30.3 6.1 13.0 0.7 3.3 65.5 0.3 – 4.1 2.6
Trends in building and loan association business
€ billion
Capital promised Capital disbursed Changes in deposits
under savings and
loan contracts AllocationsDisbursement
commitments
outstanding at
end of periodInterest and
repayments
received on
building loans  11
Deposits under
savings and
loan contractsLoans under
savings and
loan contracts  10
PeriodAmounts
paid into
savings
and
loan ac-
counts  10Interest
credited
on
deposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsRepay-
ments
of
deposits
under
cancelled
savings
and
loan
con-
tracts Totalof
which:
Net
alloca-
tions  12 Total Totalof which:
Applied
to settle-
ment of
interim
and
bridging
loans Totalof which:
Applied
to settle-
ment of
interim
and
bridging
loansNewly
granted
interim
and
bridging
loans
and
other
building
loans Totalof
which:
Under
alloc-
ated
con-
tracts Totalof
which:
Repay-
ments
during
quarterMemo
item:
Housing
bonuses
re-
ceived  13
All building and loan associations
2022 27.5 2.0 8.7 51.5 30.7 48.5 20.2 4.1 5.3 3.8 23.0 16.4 6.7 5.4 4.1 0.2
2023 Oct. 2.1 0.1 0.5 4.5 3.5 4.3 2.2 0.4 0.9 0.4 1.2 13.1 7.2 0.4 0.0
Nov. 2.2 0.1 0.4 4.6 3.6 4.2 2.3 0.4 0.8 0.4 1.2 13.0 7.3 0.4 0.0
Dec. 2.2 1.3 0.4 4.2 3.4 4.1 2.2 0.4 0.7 0.4 1.1 12.6 7.3 0.4 ... 0.0
Private building and Ioan associations
2023 Oct. 1.4 0.1 0.3 3.2 2.4 3.1 1.6 0.3 0.6 0.3 0.9 8.7 3.9 0.3 0.0
Nov. 1.4 0.1 0.2 3.1 2.3 3.0 1.6 0.3 0.5 0.3 0.9 8.6 3.9 0.3 0.0
Dec. 1.5 0.8 0.2 3.1 2.4 3.0 1.6 0.3 0.5 0.3 0.9 8.3 4.0 0.3 ... 0.0
Public building and Ioan associations
2023 Oct. 0.8 0.0 0.2 1.3 1.1 1.2 0.6 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.4 3.3 0.1 0.0
Nov. 0.8 0.0 0.2 1.5 1.3 1.3 0.7 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.4 3.4 0.1 0.0
Dec. 0.8 0.4 0.2 1.2 1.0 1.1 0.6 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.2 4.3 3.3 0.1 ... 0.0
* Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures for
the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which
appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 See Table IV.2,
footnote 1.  2 Including claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from
registered debt securities and central bank credit balances.  3 Loans under savings and
loan contracts and interim and bridging loans.  4 Including money market paper and
small amounts of other securities issued by banks.  5 Including equalisation claims.
6 Including liabilities to building and loan associations.  7 Including small amounts of
savings deposits.  8 Including participation rights capital and fund for general bankingrisks. 9 Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as
new contracts.  10 For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
arising from the allocation of contracts see "Capital disbursed".  11 Including housing
bonuses credited.  12 Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans.  13 The amounts already
credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in "Amounts paid into
savings and loan accounts" and "Interest and repayments received on building loans".

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
40•
IV. Banks
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other assets  7
Credit balances and loans Loans
PeriodGerman
banks
(MFIs)
with
foreign
branches
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diaries 
 
foreign
branches  1
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diariesBalance
sheet
total  7 Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2,3 Total Totalto
German
non-
banksto
foreign
non-
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2 Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio
Foreign branches                                               End of year or month *
2020 50 206 1,552.2 376.7 364.0 213.2 150.8 12.7 504.8 409.6 14.3 395.3 95.2 670.7 523.6
2021 51 207 1,504.5 471.2 457.8 297.9 159.9 13.4 497.2 418.8 12.9 405.9 78.4 536.1 404.5
2022 47 202 1,625.5 461.8 447.4 315.6 131.8 14.4 516.7 447.7 9.7 437.9 69.0 647.0 513.3
2023 Feb. 47 200 1,663.9 493.1 477.4 337.8 139.6 15.6 509.2 440.0 9.6 430.5 69.2 661.6 509.3
Mar. 47 199 1,565.2 471.2 454.2 313.9 140.3 17.0 500.4 432.5 9.3 423.2 67.9 593.7 437.7
Apr. 47 196 1,566.1 470.6 453.1 312.2 141.0 17.4 499.2 432.1 8.6 423.5 67.1 596.3 440.8
May 47 201 1,616.3 478.9 459.4 310.3 149.1 19.5 506.8 434.7 6.3 428.3 72.1 630.7 462.3
June 47 200 1,623.2 466.6 447.7 298.0 149.7 18.9 496.6 426.5 6.1 420.4 70.1 660.1 492.7
July 48 202 1,649.4 491.3 471.2 319.0 152.2 20.1 496.6 423.3 5.9 417.4 73.3 661.6 491.4
Aug. 48 202 1,663.5 483.7 463.8 312.6 151.2 19.9 499.1 424.2 6.1 418.1 74.9 680.8 502.7
Sep. 48 201 1,680.8 488.5 468.9 315.9 153.1 19.6 496.6 420.9 6.4 414.5 75.7 695.7 513.6
Oct. 48 201 1,693.0 477.0 457.2 306.9 150.3 19.8 499.7 420.5 6.0 414.5 79.2 716.3 529.9
Nov. 47 200 1,622.2 468.5 448.3 304.7 143.6 20.2 507.9 422.9 5.7 417.2 85.0 645.8 462.2
Changes *
2021 +1 +1 –48.4 +87.3 +87.1 +84.9 +2.2 +0.3 –26.2 –6.5 –1.3 –5.1 –19.7 –136.9 –128.1
2022 –4 –5 +124.1 –13.3 –14.3 +17.8 –32.1 +1.0 +6.7 +17.5 –3.2 +20.6 –10.8 +108.1 +103.0
2023 Mar. ±0 –1 –97.4 –20.0 –21.3 –24.0 +2.6 +1.3 –2.9 –2.3 –0.3 –2.0 –0.7 – 66.6 –70.4
Apr. ±0 –3 +1.3 +0.4 –0.0 –1.7 +1.6 +0.5 +1.6 +2.1 –0.7 +2.8 –0.5 + 3.1 + 3.5
May ±0 +5 +48.9 +5.8 +3.8 –1.9 +5.7 +2.1 +0.6 –3.7 –2.3 –1.4 +4.3 + 33.0 +20.1
June ±0 –1 +7.8 –10.5 –9.9 –12.3 +2.4 –0.6 –6.1 –4.5 –0.3 –4.2 –1.6 + 30.3 +31.2
July +1 +2 +22.9 +24.1 +22.8 +19.5 +3.3 +1.2 +1.3 –2.2 –0.2 –2.0 +3.5 + 1.7 – 0.7
Aug. ±0 – +13.4 –8.7 –8.5 –6.4 –2.1 –0.2 –0.7 –1.9 +0.2 –2.1 +1.2 + 18.5 +10.7
Sep. ±0 –1 +16.1 +2.8 +3.1 +3.3 –0.1 –0.3 –8.4 –8.7 +0.4 –9.0 +0.3 + 13.7 + 9.7
Oct. ±0 – +12.3 –11.0 –11.2 –8.9 –2.3 +0.2 +4.4 +0.7 –0.4 +1.2 +3.6 + 20.8 +16.6
Nov. –1 –1 –69.3 –6.3 –6.8 –2.2 –4.5 +0.5 +14.6 +8.2 –0.3 +8.5 +6.4 – 69.0 –66.3
Foreign subsidiaries                                           End of year or month *
2020 12 36 229.5 44.8 39.9 17.4 22.5 4.9 139.7 114.4 13.1 101.4 25.3 44.9 0.0
2021 12 35 246.0 50.8 44.4 20.7 23.7 6.3 139.5 116.3 12.6 103.7 23.2 55.7 0.0
2022 11 32 256.7 61.5 52.0 20.5 31.4 9.5 145.8 124.5 13.3 111.2 21.3 49.4 0.0
2023 Feb. 11 32 254.8 60.7 50.6 22.4 28.2 10.1 146.1 125.4 13.4 111.9 20.7 47.9 0.0
Mar. 11 32 253.9 62.2 51.7 20.7 31.0 10.5 146.5 126.2 13.3 112.9 20.2 45.2 0.0
Apr. 11 31 250.9 64.4 53.3 22.4 30.9 11.1 145.3 125.6 13.0 112.6 19.8 41.2 0.0
May 11 31 250.9 59.3 48.8 21.5 27.2 10.5 146.2 126.3 12.8 113.5 19.9 45.5 0.0
June 12 32 253.3 64.2 52.8 22.4 30.4 11.5 146.6 126.7 12.7 113.9 19.9 42.5 0.0
July 12 31 253.4 63.6 52.2 23.0 29.3 11.4 147.4 126.9 12.9 114.1 20.5 42.4 0.0
Aug. 12 31 252.8 62.8 52.2 21.9 30.3 10.6 146.0 125.6 12.7 112.9 20.4 44.1 0.0
Sep. 12 31 256.2 66.4 56.0 25.0 31.0 10.5 146.7 125.8 12.3 113.5 20.9 43.0 0.0
Oct. 12 31 257.4 65.8 56.0 24.5 31.5 9.8 146.8 126.2 12.0 114.2 20.6 44.8 0.0
Nov. 12 31 259.9 66.9 57.7 23.6 34.1 9.3 147.8 126.9 12.1 114.8 20.9 45.2 0.0
Changes *
2021 ±0 –1 +12.0 +3.8 +2.8 +3.4 –0.5 +1.0 –2.5 –0.5 –0.5 –0.0 –2.1 + 10.8 ± 0.0
2022 –1 –3 +6.5 +8.2 +5.2 –0.2 +5.6 +2.8 +5.0 +6.9 +0.7 +6.3 –1.9 – 6.5 ± 0.0
2023 Mar. – – +0.4 +2.0 +1.5 –1.7 +3.2 +0.6 +1.1 +1.6 –0.1 +1.7 –0.5 – 2.7 ± 0.0
Apr. – –1 –2.7 +2.2 +1.6 +1.7 –0.1 +0.6 –0.8 –0.4 –0.3 –0.1 –0.5 – 4.1 ± 0.0
May – – –1.5 –5.7 –4.9 –0.8 –4.1 –0.7 –0.1 –0.3 –0.2 –0.0 +0.1 + 4.3 ± 0.0
June +1 +1 +3.2 +5.3 +4.2 +0.9 +3.3 +1.0 +0.9 +0.9 –0.0 +0.9 +0.0 – 3.0 ± 0.0
July – –1 +0.6 –0.5 –0.4 +0.6 –1.0 –0.1 +1.2 +0.7 +0.1 +0.5 +0.6 – 0.1 ± 0.0
Aug. – – –1.2 –1.0 –0.2 –1.0 +0.8 –0.9 –1.8 –1.7 –0.2 –1.5 –0.1 + 1.7 ± 0.0
Sep. – – +2.2 +3.2 +3.5 +3.0 +0.5 –0.2 –0.0 –0.5 –0.4 –0.1 +0.5 – 1.0 ± 0.0
Oct. – – +1.4 –0.6 +0.1 –0.4 +0.5 –0.7 +0.2 +0.5 –0.3 +0.8 –0.3 + 1.8 ± 0.0
Nov. – – +3.8 +1.5 +2.0 –0.9 +2.9 –0.4 +1.8 +1.5 +0.1 +1.5 +0.3 + 0.4 ± 0.0
* In this table "foreign" also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated fromthe flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are always
to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following
Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Several branches in a given country of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
41•
IV. Banks
Deposits Other liabilities  6,7
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4
Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banks Total Total 
Shortterm 
Medium
and
longtermForeign
non-banksMoney
market
paper
and debt
securities
outstand-
ing 5Working
capital
and own
funds Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio Period
End of year or month *                  Foreign branches
872.2 588.5 431.8 156.7 283.7 11.7 10.2 1.5 272.0 61.5 49.9 568.6 523.1 2020
950.2 638.5 461.2 177.3 311.7 8.1 6.3 1.8 303.6 65.2 51.3 437.9 403.4 2021
943.4 573.6 435.2 138.5 369.8 10.4 8.9 1.5 359.4 61.7 63.1 557.4 512.9 2022
960.9 578.2 420.7 157.5 382.7 9.0 7.8 1.2 373.7 87.3 63.5 552.1 509.9 2023 Feb.
950.4 574.0 425.9 148.1 376.3 7.8 6.6 1.2 368.6 71.7 63.4 479.7 439.4 Mar.
940.7 561.4 407.2 154.2 379.3 7.5 6.3 1.2 371.8 79.9 62.9 482.6 442.1 Apr.
958.9 576.0 416.7 159.4 382.9 7.8 6.5 1.2 375.1 81.4 63.4 512.7 462.9 May
946.8 571.3 412.7 158.6 375.5 7.8 6.6 1.2 367.7 68.6 65.2 542.6 493.9 June
966.6 577.8 416.3 161.5 388.8 7.7 6.5 1.2 381.0 76.1 65.1 541.7 492.8 July
965.4 581.8 423.8 158.0 383.5 8.3 7.0 1.3 375.3 78.9 65.4 553.8 503.1 Aug.
963.9 571.6 418.7 152.9 392.3 11.0 9.6 1.4 381.3 84.4 66.0 566.5 513.9 Sep.
958.1 572.8 421.2 151.6 385.3 11.0 9.5 1.4 374.3 82.9 66.0 586.0 530.5 Oct.
958.5 561.4 414.6 146.8 397.0 11.5 10.3 1.2 385.5 81.2 65.9 516.6 463.3 Nov.
Changes *
+71.1 +43.1 +31.0 +12.0 + 28.1 – 3.6 – 3.9 + 0.3 +31.7 + 0.1 + 1.4 –130.8 – 119.7 2021
– 6.2 –64.2 –22.2 –42.0 + 58.0 + 2.3 + 2.6 – 0.3 +55.7 – 6.3 +11.8 +119.0 + 109.5 2022
– 7.8 –1.8 +5.2 –7.0 – 6.0 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 5.8 –14.3 –0.2 – 72.3 – 70.5 2023 Mar.
– 8.3 –11.4 –18.7 +7.3 + 3.1 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 3.4 + 8.6 –0.5 + 2.9 + 2.7 Apr.
+15.1 +11.7 +9.4 +2.3 + 3.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 3.1 + 0.1 +0.5 + 30.0 + 20.8 May
– 9.8 –2.5 –3.9 +1.4 – 7.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 7.3 –11.9 +1.9 + 29.9 + 31.0 June
+17.8 +5.9 +1.7 +4.3 +11.9 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.0 +12.0 + 8.0 –0.1 – 1.4 – 1.1 July
– 2.6 +2.9 +7.6 –4.8 – 5.4 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 – 5.8 + 2.2 +0.3 + 12.1 + 10.3 Aug.
– 4.2 –12.7 –5.1 –7.6 + 8.4 + 2.7 + 2.7 + 0.1 + 5.7 + 4.2 +0.6 + 12.8 + 10.8 Sep.
– 5.2 +1.7 +2.5 –0.8 – 6.9 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 6.9 – 1.3 +0.0 + 19.4 + 16.6 Oct.
+ 3.1 –8.9 –6.6 –2.3 +12.0 + 0.5 + 0.8 – 0.3 +11.5 – 0.2 –0.2 – 69.3 – 67.1 Nov.
End of year or month * Foreign subsidiaries
163.4 59.6 34.1 25.5 103.8 6.7 4.2 2.5 97.1 16.6 20.3 29.2 0.0 2020
178.6 64.2 33.0 31.2 114.4 7.3 4.9 2.4 107.1 16.4 20.3 30.7 0.0 2021
189.4 67.5 38.6 28.9 122.0 6.9 4.6 2.3 115.1 13.5 20.1 33.7 0.0 2022
187.2 69.3 40.3 29.1 117.9 6.9 4.4 2.5 110.9 12.7 20.2 34.7 0.0 2023 Feb.
186.6 71.2 42.2 29.1 115.4 6.8 4.3 2.5 108.5 12.3 20.3 34.8 0.0 Mar.
183.5 71.0 44.0 27.0 112.5 6.9 4.5 2.5 105.6 12.2 20.2 35.0 0.0 Apr.
183.9 71.2 43.6 27.6 112.8 6.9 4.4 2.5 105.9 12.1 20.6 34.3 0.0 May
185.6 71.9 45.4 26.5 113.7 6.6 4.2 2.4 107.1 10.6 20.5 36.6 0.0 June
187.9 72.3 47.0 25.3 115.6 6.8 4.4 2.4 108.8 10.5 20.5 34.4 0.0 July
185.5 70.6 46.0 24.7 114.8 6.6 4.2 2.4 108.2 10.3 20.6 36.4 0.0 Aug.
188.2 74.1 49.1 25.1 114.1 6.7 4.3 2.4 107.4 11.3 20.5 36.0 0.0 Sep.
189.3 73.1 48.3 24.8 116.2 6.5 4.1 2.4 109.7 11.6 20.8 35.8 0.0 Oct.
192.1 73.7 48.4 25.3 118.4 6.5 4.1 2.4 111.8 11.6 20.8 35.4 0.0 Nov.
Changes *
+12.1 + 3.2 – 1.1 + 4.3 + 8.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 – 0.1 + 8.3 – 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 ± 0.0 2021
+ 7.7 + 1.4 + 5.6 – 4.2 + 6.3 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.1 + 6.7 – 2.9 – 0.2 + 2.2 ± 0.0 2022
+ 0.3 +2.2 +1.9 +0.3 – 1.9 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 1.8 – 0.4 +0.0 + 0.4 ± 0.0 2023 Mar.
– 2.7 –0.1 +1.8 –1.9 – 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 2.7 – 0.1 –0.1 + 0.2 ± 0.0 Apr.
– 0.6 –0.3 –0.4 +0.2 – 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.4 – 0.0 +0.4 – 1.2 ± 0.0 May
+ 2.3 +1.0 +1.8 –0.9 + 1.3 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 1.6 – 1.6 –0.1 + 2.5 ± 0.0 June
+ 2.7 +0.6 +1.6 –1.1 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 2.0 – 0.0 +0.0 – 2.1 ± 0.0 July
– 2.9 –1.9 –1.0 –0.8 – 1.1 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.9 – 0.2 +0.1 + 1.8 ± 0.0 Aug.
+ 1.9 +3.2 +3.1 +0.1 – 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 1.4 + 1.0 –0.1 – 0.7 ± 0.0 Sep.
+ 1.2 –1.0 –0.8 –0.2 + 2.2 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 2.3 + 0.2 +0.3 – 0.2 ± 0.0 Oct.
+ 3.7 +0.9 +0.1 +0.8 + 2.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 2.8 + 0.1 +0.0 – 0.0 ± 0.0 Nov.
domicile are regarded as a single branch.  2 Treasury bills, Treasury discount paper and
other money market paper, debt securities.  3 Including own debt securities.  4 Excluding
subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities.  5 Issues of negotiable andnon-negotiable debt securities and money market paper.  6 Including subordinated
liabilities.  7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
42•
V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2Required reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4 Current accounts  5Excess reserves
(without deposit
facility)  6 Deficiencies  7
2016 11,918.5 119.2 118.8 919.0 800.3 0.0
2017 12,415.8 124.2 123.8 1,275.2 1,151.4 0.0
2018 12,775.2 127.8 127.4 1,332.1 1,204.8 0.0
2019 13,485.4 134.9 134.5 1,623.7 1,489.3 0.0
2020 14,590.4 145.9 145.5 3,029.4 2,883.9 0.0
2021 15,576.6 155.8 155.4 3,812.3 3,656.9 0.1
2022 16,843.0 168.4 168.0 195.6 28.1 0.0
2023 Nov. 16,421.9 164.2 163.9 172.0 8.1 0.0
Dec. 16,261.6 162.6 162.3 170.5 8.2 0.0
p 2024 Jan. 16,168.3 161.7 161.4 ... ... ...
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2German share of
euro area reserve base
as a percentageRequired reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4Current accounts  5Excess reserves
(without deposit
facility)  6 Deficiencies  7
2016 3,371,095 28.3 33,711 33,546 301,989 268,443 0
2017 3,456,192 27.8 34,562 34,404 424,547 390,143 2
2018 3,563,306 27.9 35,633 35,479 453,686 418,206 1
2019 3,728,027 27.6 37,280 37,131 486,477 449,346 0
2020 4,020,792 27.6 40,208 40,062 878,013 837,951 1
2021 4,260,398 27.4 42,604 42,464 1,048,819 1,006,355 0
2022 4,664,630 27.7 46,646 46,512 54,848 8,337 5
2023 Nov. 4,471,738 27.2 44,717 44,587 47,283 2,695 2
Dec. 4,483,853 27.6 44,839 44,709 47,008 2,299 0
p 2024 Jan. 4,472,389 27.7 44,724 44,594 ... ... ...
a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Big banksRegional banks
and other
commercial banksBranches of
foreign banksLandesbanken and
savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banksBanks with special,
development and
other central
support tasks
2016 6,384 5,390 2,812 10,905 5,960 236 1,859
2017 6,366 5,678 3,110 11,163 6,256 132 1,699
2018 7,384 4,910 3,094 11,715 6,624 95 1,658
2019 7,684 5,494 2,765 12,273 7,028 109 1,778
2020 8,151 6,371 3,019 12,912 7,547 111 2,028
2021 9,113 6,713 2,943 13,682 8,028 109 1,876
2022 9,814 7,396 3,216 14,465 8,295 117 2,471
2023 Nov. 9,268 7,182 3,194 14,061 8,152 145 2,248
Dec. 9,282 7,417 3,170 14,061 8,178 148 2,118
2024 Jan. 9,255 7,225 3,200 14,102 8,227 142 2,143
b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Liabilities (excluding savings
deposits, deposits with build-
ing and loan associations
and repos) to non-MFIs with
agreed maturities of up to 2
yearsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed maturities
of up to 2 years to MFIs that are
resident in euro area countries but
not subject to minimum reserve
requirementsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed
maturities of up to 2 years to
banks in non-euro area countriesSavings deposits with agreed
periods of notice of up
to 2 yearsLiabilities arising from bearer debt
securities issued with agreed matu-
rities of up to 2 years and bearer
money market paper after deduction
of a standard amount for bearer debt
certificates or deduction of such
paper held by the reporting
institution
2016 2,203,100 1,595 447,524 585,099 133,776
2017 2,338,161 628 415,084 581,416 120,894
2018 2,458,423 1,162 414,463 576,627 112,621
2019 2,627,478 1,272 410,338 577,760 111,183
2020 2,923,462 1,607 436,696 560,770 105,880
2021 3,079,722 9,030 508,139 561,608 101,907
2022 3,352,177 12,609 566,227 543,694 116,094
2023 Nov. 3,419,899 2,345 423,373 462,063 130,302
Dec. 3,447,513 968 420,839 455,493 125,531
2024 Jan. 3,463,317 783 396,708 448,157 133,396
1 The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main refinancing
operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for
which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled.  2 Article 5 of the
Regulation (EU) 2021/378 of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum
reserve requirements (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies,
pursuant to Article 6(1)(a)).  3 Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was 2%between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it has stood at
1%. 4 Article 6(2) of the Regulation (EU) 2021/378 of the European Central Bank on the
application of minimum reserve requirements.  5 Average credit balances of credit
institutions at national central banks.  6 Average credit balances less required reserves
after deduction of the lump-sum allowance.  7 Required reserves after deduction of the
lump-sum allowance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
43•
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest
% per annum
ECB interest rates Basic rates of interest
Main refinancing
operationsMain refinancing
operations
Applicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1Applicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1
2012 July 11 0.00 0.75 – 1.50 2022 July 27 0.00 0.50 – 0.75 2007 Jan. 1 2.70 2013 Jan. 1 – 0.13
Sep. 14 0.75 1.25 – 1.50 July 1 3.19 July 1 – 0.38
2013 May 8 0.00 0.50 – 1.00 Nov. 2 1.50 2.00 – 2.25
Nov. 13 0.00 0.25 – 0.75 Dec. 21 2.00 2.50 – 2.75 2008 Jan. 1 3.32 2014 Jan. 1 – 0.63
July 1 3.19 July 1 – 0.73
2014 June 11 – 0.10 0.15 – 2023 Feb. 8 2.50 3.00 – 3.25
Sep. 10 – 0.20 0.05 – 2.00 Mar. 22 3.00 3.50 – 3.75 2009 Jan. 1 1.62 2015 Jan. 1 – 0.83
2.25 May 10 3.25 3.75 – 4.00 July 1 0.12
2015 Dec. 9 – 0.30 0.05 – 2.00 June 21 3.50 4.00 – 4.25 2016 July 1 – 0.88
Aug. 2 3.75 4.25 – 4.50 2011 July 1 0.37
2016 Mar. 16 – 0.40 0.00 – 0.25 Sep. 20 4.00 4.50 – 4.75 2023 Jan. 1 1.62
2012 Jan. 1 0.12 July 1 3.12
2019 Sep. 18 – 0.50 0.00 – 0.25
2024 Jan. 1 3.62
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid
amountAllotment
amount Fixed rateMinimum
bid rate Marginal rate  1Weighted
average rate
Date of
Settlement € million % per annumRunning for
… days
Main refinancing operations
2024 Jan. 17 5 864 5 864 4.50 – – – 7
Jan. 24 5 649 5 649 4.50 – – – 7
Jan. 31 6 377 6 377 4.50 – – – 7
Feb. 7 4 740 4 740 4.50 – – – 7
Feb. 14 4 310 4 310 4.50 – – – 7
Long-term refinancing operations
2023 Nov. 30 2 333 2 333 2      … – – − 90
Dec. 21 1 060 1 060 2      … – – − 97
2024 Jan. 31 1 258 1 258 2      … – – − 92
* Source: ECB.  1 Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or
collected.  2 Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at: a) the
average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of thisoperation including a spread or b) the average deposit facility rate over the life of this
operation.
3. Money market rates, by month
% per annum
EURIBOR ®  2
Monthly
average €STR  1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Twelve-month funds
2023 June 3.238 3.250 3.340 3.540 3.830 4.010
July 3.402 3.400 3.470 3.670 3.940 4.150
Aug. 3.642 3.630 3.630 3.780 3.940 4.070
Sep. 3.747 3.750 3.760 3.880 4.030 4.150
Oct. 3.901 3.880 3.860 3.970 4.120 4.160
Nov. 3.902 3.874 3.841 3.972 4.065 4.022
Dec. 3.902 3.858 3.858 3.935 3.927 3.679
2024 Jan. 3.904 3.874 3.869 3.925 3.892 3.609
* Publication does not establish an entitlement to provision of the rates. The Deutsche
Bundesbank reserves the right to cease publishing the information on its website in
future. All data are supplied without liability. No explicit or implicit assurances or
guarantees are made as to the up-to-dateness, accuracy, timeliness, completeness,
marketability or suitability of the data as interest rates or reference interest rates.
Neither the European Money Markets Institute (EMMI), nor Euribor EBF, nor Euribor
ACI, nor the Euribor Panel Banks, nor the Euribor Steering Committee, nor the
European Central Bank, nor Reuters, nor the Deutsche Bundesbank can be held liable
for any irregularity or inaccuracy, incompleteness or late provision of the money market
rates. With regard to the €STR please consider the European Central Bank's disclaimer,
which also applies for the Deutsche Bundesbank's publication:
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/financial_markets_and_interest_rates/euro_short-
term_rate/html/index.en.html
1 Euro Short-Term Rate: On the basis of individual euro-denominated transactions
conducted and settled on the previous business day, the European Central Bankpublishes the €STR since 2 October 2019. Transactions are reported by euro area banks
subject to reporting obligations in compliance with Money Market Statistical Reporting
Regulation. Monthly averages are calculations by Deutsche Bundesbank.  2 Monthly
averages are own calculations by Deutsche Bundesbank based on Euribor® daily rates
calculated by the European Money Markets Institute (EMMI). These are unweighted
averages. Information on the methodology of Euribor® daily rates are available below.
Please be aware that commercial use of these data is only possible with a licence
agreement with the European Money Markets Institute (EMMI). Information on its
terms of use are available under the link below. Values calculated from November 2023
onwards with three decimal places. Previous values calculated with two decimal places.
For technical reasons, these values are also displayed with three decimal places and the
third decimal place is filled with a 0. Up to and including October 2023 all values
calculated and published with two decimal places
https://www.emmi-benchmarks.eu/terms-of-use
https://www.emmi-benchmarks.eu/benchmarks/euribor/

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
44•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
a) Outstanding amounts o
Households' deposits Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2022 Dec. 1.16 84,147 0.86 220,466 1.39 123,678 1.02 22,605
2023 Jan. 1.37 103,036 0.87 221,773 1.67 131,363 1.05 23,299
Feb. 1.57 119,894 0.87 222,671 1.98 140,254 1.07 23,409
Mar. 1.77 140,046 0.88 223,661 2.29 148,756 1.09 22,527
Apr. 1.91 157,796 0.89 224,586 2.44 155,233 1.12 22,140
May 2.07 180,323 0.90 225,884 2.65 153,693 1.17 22,199
June 2.23 200,501 0.91 226,645 2.86 162,035 1.20 22,133
July 2.37 222,529 0.92 227,182 3.01 168,874 1.24 21,619
Aug. 2.52 246,001 0.94 228,521 3.15 180,132 1.27 21,610
Sep. 2.61 262,537 0.95 229,285 3.27 181,385 1.28 21,507
Oct. 2.76 288,227 0.97 230,966 3.39 197,527 1.32 21,449
Nov. 2.88 315,984 1.01 233,972 3.43 193,442 1.39 21,232
Dec. 2.96 339,169 1.04 237,707 3.47 191,529 1.43 20,936
Housing loans to households  3 Loans to households for consumption and other purposes  4,5
with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2022 Dec. 3.66 3,497 2.37 26,984 1.74 1,535,823 7.73 47,250 3.68 76,467 3.49 331,711
2023 Jan. 4.10 3,550 2.52 26,527 1.76 1,534,684 8.20 46,598 3.78 75,973 3.55 332,207
Feb. 4.32 3,429 2.64 26,317 1.77 1,536,492 8.44 47,291 3.84 75,755 3.59 332,184
Mar. 4.45 3,493 2.77 26,266 1.78 1,540,365 8.67 48,137 3.94 75,854 3.64 330,164
Apr. 4.72 3,490 2.94 26,102 1.79 1,542,767 8.86 47,023 4.05 75,742 3.72 330,568
May 4.93 3,423 3.03 25,960 1.81 1,544,206 9.12 47,513 4.14 75,472 3.77 330,677
June 5.10 3,298 3.13 25,865 1.82 1,546,102 9.25 48,284 4.24 76,260 3.83 329,576
July 5.34 3,413 3.26 25,712 1.83 1,548,159 9.45 47,192 4.35 76,468 3.90 330,500
Aug. 5.41 3,391 3.33 25,573 1.85 1,550,499 9.55 47,277 4.45 76,654 3.95 330,602
Sep. 5.49 3,233 3.38 25,315 1.86 1,553,618 9.72 47,706 4.54 76,662 3.99 329,641
Oct. 5.57 3,312 3.50 25,212 1.87 1,554,344 9.95 47,325 4.65 76,583 4.06 329,490
Nov. 5.70 3,294 3.58 24,792 1.89 1,556,410 9.99 46,653 4.74 76,885 4.09 328,941
Dec. 5.62 3,489 3.64 24,483 1.90 1,556,248 10.01 47,838 4.81 77,027 4.13 326,754
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2022 Dec. 3.70 192,635 2.83 240,161 2.01 872,949
2023 Jan. 4.04 199,612 3.07 241,498 2.05 876,315
Feb. 4.28 194,396 3.22 246,124 2.07 878,910
Mar. 4.66 193,205 3.45 245,152 2.13 876,723
Apr. 4.98 194,154 3.65 247,337 2.19 879,353
May 5.19 194,261 3.76 252,289 2.22 885,481
June 5.42 193,968 3.95 250,107 2.29 883,229
July 5.62 194,789 4.09 251,312 2.35 887,112
Aug. 5.72 188,564 4.17 251,445 2.37 889,482
Sep. 5.89 187,448 4.29 248,998 2.41 887,643
Oct. 6.05 186,407 4.42 251,931 2.45 889,648
Nov. 5.97 187,977 4.45 253,976 2.48 892,391
Dec. 6.05 180,732 4.50 255,603 2.51 891,540
* The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate
statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the related volumes of
euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non-financial corporations
domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises individuals (including sole
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations
include all enterprises other than insurance corporations, banks and other financial
institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional.
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the
Bundesbank’s website (Statistics/Money and capital markets/Interest rates and
yields/Interest rates on deposits and loans).  o The statistics on outstanding amounts are
collected at the end of the month.  1 The effective interest rates are calculated either asannualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation
methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related
charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents,
guarantees and credit insurance.  2 Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics.
3 Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home
improvements; including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim
credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name
and for their own account.  4 Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for
the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services.  5 For the
purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as
business, debt consolidation, education, etc.  6 Including overdrafts (see also footnotes
12 to 14 on p. 47 ).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
45•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Households' deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice  8 of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2022 Dec. 0.07 1,857,241 1.53 20,197 2.01 1,738 1.52 2,138 0.16 510,188 0.40 22,970
2023 Jan. 0.09 1,839,201 1.68 26,082 2.14 2,941 1.97 2,504 0.20 498,875 0.53 23,945
Feb. 0.12 1,828,243 1.95 25,533 2.24 2,346 2.09 1,853 0.26 490,990 0.67 25,179
Mar. 0.17 1,801,473 2.19 29,674 2.36 3,672 2.07 2,194 0.30 480,790 0.84 26,746
Apr. 0.22 1,807,037 2.33 28,088 2.47 3,409 2.35 2,055 0.35 470,731 0.96 28,261
May 0.30 1,792,902 2.58 35,359 2.67 4,281 2.39 2,371 0.39 460,587 1.13 30,499
June 0.34 1,782,329 2.78 34,870 2.91 4,260 2.53 1,999 0.43 450,713 1.28 33,163
July 0.41 1,773,505 2.94 38,938 2.98 3,412 2.59 2,044 0.50 440,519 1.48 36,162
Aug. 0.51 1,757,994 3.12 46,037 3.15 4,422 2.81 2,374 0.55 429,372 1.62 38,895
Sep. 0.55 1,748,975 3.22 40,232 3.30 3,611 2.92 1,787 0.59 420,872 1.76 41,824
Oct. 0.56 1,728,935 3.40 51,187 3.46 5,558 2.99 2,743 0.64 411,490 1.94 44,837
Nov. 0.59 1,726,394 3.46 57,743 3.40 6,243 3.18 4,292 0.67 400,980 2.09 48,268
Dec. 0.60 1,731,638 3.37 49,974 3.25 4,896 3.17 4,389 0.69 396,006 2.17 50,818
Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2022 Dec. 0.11 601,728 1.66 65,813 2.94 734 2.42 252
2023 Jan. 0.19 595,205 1.96 89,287 2.92 671 2.41 89
Feb. 0.28 580,954 2.31 100,034 3.09 539 2.17 238
Mar. 0.44 568,777 2.58 89,971 2.95 723 2.62 292
Apr. 0.48 558,564 2.82 79,535 3.14 655 2.83 210
May 0.55 558,743 3.01 81,462 2.86 625 2.64 225
June 0.63 548,727 3.20 88,967 3.48 703 2.90 206
July 0.72 551,199 3.34 79,832 3.53 614 3.26 252
Aug. 0.81 548,242 3.50 89,027 3.46 570 2.93 210
Sep. 0.92 548,230 3.64 95,610 3.63 807 2.96 287
Oct. 0.97 551,400 3.74 95,412 3.78 752 2.97 266
Nov. 1.02 556,270 3.73 99,933 3.71 820 3.30 418
Dec. 1.02 553,799 3.71 92,454 3.47 855 2.98 343
Loans to households
Loans for consumption  4 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2022 Dec. 6.62 6.71 7,270 7.69 1,091 7.64 465 5.26 3,083 7.79 3,722
2023 Jan. 7.49 7.54 8,159 8.43 1,607 7.95 406 6.01 2,728 8.34 5,025
Feb. 7.56 7.52 7,505 8.42 1,364 8.96 307 6.13 2,664 8.24 4,534
Mar. 7.74 7.70 8,778 8.62 1,592 8.71 322 6.39 3,150 8.42 5,306
Apr. 8.10 7.99 7,348 8.87 1,351 9.77 278 6.69 2,551 8.62 4,519
May 8.13 8.07 8,269 9.00 1,505 9.98 296 6.79 2,819 8.66 5,154
June 8.05 7.99 9,277 9.15 1,568 10.32 316 6.62 3,493 8.72 5,468
July 8.40 8.35 8,628 9.32 1,609 10.92 295 7.04 2,974 8.94 5,359
Aug. 8.46 8.43 8,818 9.46 1,689 10.65 288 7.13 3,011 9.02 5,518
Sep. 8.57 8.47 8,036 9.53 1,530 10.21 274 7.18 2,798 9.11 4,964
Oct. 8.66 8.55 8,347 9.62 1,655 9.43 288 7.21 2,893 9.24 5,166
Nov. 8.72 8.55 8,130 9.70 1,626 8.45 329 7.29 2,863 9.29 4,938
Dec. 8.69 8.25 6,106 9.28 905 7.99 298 7.22 2,491 9.04 3,317
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnote x see p. 47●. + For deposits with
an agreed maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card
debt: new business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial
corporations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted
average rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. For
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts,
credit card debt: new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for
the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending business atthe end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average rates of
interest.  7 Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form the
underlying total using a grossing-up procedure.  8 Including non-financial corporations’
deposits; including fidelity and growth premiums.  9 Excluding overdrafts.  10 Annual
percentage rate of charge, which contains other related charges which may occur for
enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit
insurance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
46•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd)
Loans to households for other purposes  5 with an initial rate fixation of
Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Loans to households 
2022 Dec. 3.90 5,403 3.43 1,210 3.86 3,026 4.24 762 3.80 1,615
2023 Jan. 4.10 3,906 3.74 1,286 3.98 2,082 4.55 621 4.07 1,203
Feb. 4.35 3,065 4.03 814 4.36 1,467 4.83 508 4.10 1,090
Mar. 4.56 4,852 4.29 1,293 4.66 2,388 4.87 761 4.28 1,703
Apr. 4.64 3,803 4.45 1,210 4.76 1,767 4.92 744 4.31 1,292
May 4.83 3,400 4.62 997 5.08 1,511 5.10 710 4.37 1,179
June 4.93 4,341 4.68 1,388 5.26 1,974 5.19 892 4.33 1,475
July 4.96 4,086 4.54 1,161 5.39 1,766 5.12 933 4.31 1,387
Aug. 5.16 3,430 5.02 882 5.72 1,290 5.24 910 4.50 1,230
Sep. 5.24 3,526 5.08 814 5.76 1,489 5.29 848 4.54 1,189
Oct. 5.45 3,348 5.37 1,068 5.95 1,483 5.57 724 4.73 1,141
Nov. 5.43 3,152 5.13 765 5.90 1,345 5.53 764 4.76 1,043
Dec. 5.20 4,287 5.21 988 5.77 1,719 5.12 1,234 4.54 1,334
    of which: Loans to sole proprietors
2022 Dec. 4.11 3,777 . . 4.10 2,187 4.51 554 3.89 1,036
2023 Jan. 4.18 2,830 . . 4.06 1,489 4.75 465 4.07 876
Feb. 4.44 2,297 . . 4.47 1,105 4.94 411 4.15 781
Mar. 4.69 3,544 . . 4.75 1,822 5.13 567 4.37 1,155
Apr. 4.77 2,657 . . 4.90 1,207 5.01 575 4.44 875
May 4.98 2,473 . . 5.28 1,072 5.24 547 4.44 854
June 5.04 3,178 . . 5.36 1,535 5.36 633 4.35 1,010
July 5.09 2,963 . . 5.48 1,337 5.48 592 4.37 1,034
Aug. 5.30 2,381 . . 5.91 934 5.55 551 4.53 896
Sep. 5.32 2,459 . . 5.80 1,094 5.57 523 4.55 842
Oct. 5.52 2,472 . . 6.03 1,094 5.67 547 4.74 831
Nov. 5.52 2,249 . . 6.06 900 5.60 587 4.82 762
Dec. 5.42 2,861 . . 5.93 1,256 5.58 660 4.63 945
Loans to households (cont'd)
Housing loans  3 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 yearsover 5 year and
up to 10 years over 10 years
Erhebungs-
zeitraumAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2022 Dec. 3.60 3.52 13,514 3.17 2,756 3.57 2,620 3.74 1,267 3.41 4,837 3.55 4,790
2023 Jan. 3.73 3.66 12,735 3.47 3,076 3.95 2,244 3.80 1,196 3.45 4,531 3.70 4,764
Feb. 3.85 3.79 12,055 3.73 2,724 4.16 2,097 3.99 1,207 3.60 4,229 3.74 4,522
Mar. 3.95 3.88 15,260 3.76 3,248 4.44 2,459 4.10 1,524 3.64 5,388 3.80 5,889
Apr. 3.98 3.93 12,999 4.06 2,870 4.63 2,109 4.23 1,276 3.70 4,471 3.77 5,144
May 3.99 3.94 13,657 3.92 2,945 4.82 2,148 4.27 1,359 3.66 5,038 3.76 5,112
June 4.12 4.06 13,983 4.28 2,565 5.05 2,301 4.38 1,450 3.73 4,986 3.84 5,246
July 4.08 4.02 14,335 4.03 2,845 5.20 1,949 4.37 1,469 3.71 5,352 3.82 5,564
Aug. 4.19 4.14 14,386 4.43 2,611 5.29 2,198 4.53 1,388 3.81 5,275 3.89 5,525
Sep. 4.17 4.12 12,286 4.32 2,017 5.40 1,523 4.48 1,171 3.89 4,534 3.85 5,058
Oct. 4.22 4.18 13,831 4.39 2,853 5.53 1,989 4.53 1,403 3.85 5,304 3.90 5,136
Nov. 4.27 4.22 13,473 4.56 2,236 5.62 1,723 4.61 1,588 3.92 4,936 3.92 5,225
Dec. 4.12 4.05 12,151 4.32 2,055 5.56 1,576 4.44 1,553 3.80 4,349 3.65 4,672
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2022 Dec. . 3.43 5,975 . . 3.46 923 3.64 554 3.36 2,213 3.42 2,285
2023 Jan. . 3.51 5,615 . . 3.85 813 3.66 584 3.38 2,136 3.47 2,082
Feb. . 3.64 5,134 . . 4.04 763 3.84 556 3.49 1,928 3.58 1,887
Mar. . 3.74 6,734 . . 4.30 841 4.05 752 3.56 2,520 3.65 2,621
Apr. . 3.79 5,967 . . 4.61 824 4.02 601 3.59 2,141 3.62 2,401
May . 3.82 5,821 . . 4.68 789 4.14 629 3.59 2,225 3.66 2,178
June . 3.85 6,185 . . 4.81 836 4.13 648 3.61 2,314 3.67 2,387
July . 3.88 6,592 . . 5.08 729 4.20 661 3.63 2,384 3.72 2,818
Aug. . 3.96 6,467 . . 5.10 767 4.29 637 3.73 2,399 3.75 2,664
Sep. . 3.93 5,704 . . 5.36 540 4.32 551 3.78 2,092 3.65 2,521
Oct. . 4.01 6,207 . . 5.44 769 4.38 587 3.73 2,335 3.76 2,516
Nov. . 4.02 6,174 . . 5.50 669 4.45 728 3.80 2,170 3.70 2,607
Dec. . 3.86 5,588 . . 5.39 612 4.29 609 3.73 1,935 3.47 2,432
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
footnote 11, see p. 47●.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
47•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which: of which:
Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13Extended
credit card debtRevolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2022 Dec. 8.70 38,597 8.53 27,493 15.55 6,515 3.99 94,611 4.01 94,205
2023 Jan. 9.16 38,116 8.95 27,199 16.34 6,480 4.31 98,205 4.32 97,791
Feb. 9.40 38,538 9.32 27,356 16.60 6,475 4.63 98,285 4.65 97,859
Mar. 9.56 39,280 9.54 28,281 16.58 6,390 5.08 98,123 5.11 97,659
Apr. 9.78 38,352 9.76 27,177 17.13 6,407 5.44 99,534 5.47 99,094
May 9.98 38,906 10.10 27,431 17.19 6,478 5.61 99,175 5.63 98,709
June 10.11 39,692 10.30 28,067 17.23 6,528 5.83 99,351 5.86 98,897
July 10.32 38,818 10.48 27,182 17.58 6,580 6.00 98,185 6.03 97,770
Aug. 10.39 39,026 10.60 27,146 17.79 6,611 6.11 94,939 6.14 94,514
Sep. 10.59 39,548 10.75 27,976 17.86 6,629 6.25 95,468 6.28 95,004
Oct. 10.82 39,186 11.02 27,570 18.09 6,656 6.42 94,418 6.45 93,913
Nov. 10.80 38,416 10.95 26,932 18.18 6,614 6.41 95,688 6.44 95,191
Dec. 10.76 39,483 11.03 27,639 18.17 6,609 6.49 92,618 6.52 92,165
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which: Loans up to €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of Loans over €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of
TotalRenegotiated
loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 yearsfloating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2022 Dec. 3.45 107,068 3.42 32,607 3.91 11,995 4.98 1,854 3.81 1,138 3.35 75,616 3.55 6,334 3.25 10,131
2023 Jan. 3.59 81,688 3.66 23,420 4.41 10,450 5.10 1,586 3.88 1,021 3.42 60,491 3.85 2,968 3.24 5,172
Feb. 3.88 85,530 3.83 19,830 4.84 10,275 5.58 1,480 4.06 863 3.70 64,785 4.07 2,789 3.66 5,338
Mar. 4.36 102,182 4.20 29,585 5.18 12,826 5.70 2,212 4.13 1,223 4.24 70,035 4.41 5,308 3.91 10,578
Apr. 4.45 73,584 4.46 23,051 5.24 9,722 5.84 1,572 4.32 999 4.36 51,380 4.18 3,476 3.77 6,435
May 4.65 79,772 4.62 21,546 5.37 11,322 6.13 1,607 4.22 1,060 4.59 55,568 4.00 3,590 4.00 6,625
June 4.88 100,910 4.89 33,256 5.58 12,583 6.39 1,760 4.31 1,219 4.85 72,375 4.70 4,371 3.95 8,602
July 5.06 85,629 4.88 28,176 6.39 10,764 6.54 1,838 4.35 1,167 4.91 61,061 5.32 3,989 3.94 6,810
Aug. 5.11 73,312 5.15 21,335 6.01 10,015 6.63 1,698 4.46 999 5.06 51,942 4.47 3,017 3.95 5,641
Sep. 5.16 83,317 5.30 25,702 6.04 10,804 6.76 1,689 4.35 959 5.09 60,497 5.03 3,077 4.10 6,291
Oct. 5.39 76,734 5.27 24,750 6.35 10,963 6.93 1,781 4.61 912 5.30 54,862 5.02 3,674 4.11 4,542
Nov. 5.17 79,316 5.28 22,467 6.27 10,430 6.87 1,838 4.50 936 5.07 56,524 4.66 3,644 4.10 5,944
Dec. 5.19 108,487 5.34 31,589 6.07 11,245 6.60 2,020 4.33 1,115 5.28 76,500 4.63 7,141 3.79 10,466
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2022 Dec. 3.41 17,202 . . 3.72 588 4.08 126 3.41 291 3.41 10,703 4.20 1,417 3.08 4,077
2023 Jan. . . . . 4.00 553 3.72 123 . . 3.92 6,635 4.01 652 3.07 1,196
Feb. 3.93 8,371 . . 4.34 400 4.37 96 3.61 208 4.03 6,148 3.87 514 3.20 1,005
Mar. 4.15 14,364 . . 4.60 641 4.73 117 3.62 331 4.22 10,350 4.11 1,117 3.64 1,808
Apr. 4.48 10,295 . . 4.88 452 4.52 120 3.81 269 4.71 6,760 4.81 541 3.69 2,153
May . . . . 5.06 456 4.80 108 3.80 268 . . 4.37 876 3.77 1,623
June . . . . 5.14 573 4.75 99 3.87 340 . . 5.16 1,293 3.75 1,183
July 4.86 11,078 . . 5.44 489 4.91 126 3.98 325 4.87 6,823 5.86 1,544 3.94 1,771
Aug. 5.08 9,797 . . 5.58 425 5.01 122 3.85 279 5.45 6,747 4.32 890 3.79 1,334
Sep. . . . . 5.63 450 5.28 109 3.88 253 . . 5.19 1,187 3.76 1,487
Oct. 5.05 12,103 . . 5.66 508 5.14 140 3.95 213 5.21 8,840 5.38 1,005 3.73 1,397
Nov. 4.69 10,586 . . 5.73 353 4.83 107 3.88 250 4.90 7,211 4.51 1,045 3.74 1,620
Dec. 4.83 15,673 . . 5.55 459 5.01 139 3.82 291 5.22 10,040 4.81 1,915 3.45 2,829
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
11 For the purposes of the interest rate statistics, a loan is considered to be secured if
collateral (amongst others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at
least the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned.
12 Including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower
may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior
notice to the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as
funds are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no
obligation of regular repayment of funds.  13 Overdrafts are defined as debit balanceson current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are
within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank.  14 Including
convenience and extended credit card debt. Convenience credit is defined as the credit
granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period between payment transactions effected
with the card during one billing cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this
specific billing cycle become due.  15 The amount category refers to the single loan
transaction considered as new business.  x Dominated by the business of one or two
banks. Therefore, the value cannot be published due to confidentiality.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
48•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets
€ billion
End of
year/quarter TotalCurrency
and
deposits  1Debt
securities Loans  2Shares and
other equityInvestment
fund
shares/unitsFinancial
derivativesTechnical
reserves  3Non-financial
assetsRemaining
assets
Insurance corporations 
2021 Q1 2,592.3 292.4 470.7 361.7 437.4 858.1 3.9 71.9 38.9 57.2
Q2 2,609.9 280.5 470.3 361.2 449.2 879.6 3.4 72.5 38.9 54.2
Q3 2,653.1 271.7 474.2 358.2 463.4 899.8 3.3 87.8 38.3 56.3
Q4 2,667.2 261.3 468.6 355.1 472.4 921.6 3.2 85.0 40.8 59.3
2022 Q1 2,547.3 243.7 440.2 333.2 468.7 870.5 2.7 87.5 41.0 59.8
Q2 2,369.7 215.6 390.3 305.5 462.5 803.5 3.0 85.5 41.3 62.5
Q3 2,296.2 202.0 369.9 289.1 461.2 776.7 4.0 84.2 41.4 67.6
Q4 2,274.7 189.5 373.7 279.7 465.8 772.2 3.4 79.5 38.7 72.2
2023 Q1 2,326.9 201.7 380.8 280.2 472.3 790.3 3.6 85.2 38.5 74.4
Q2 2,330.1 194.7 383.3 280.0 474.3 799.0 3.6 84.1 38.1 73.0
Q3 2,304.1 185.9 376.1 272.3 480.8 783.5 3.7 88.9 38.2 74.7
    Life insurance
2021 Q1 1,372.8 170.4 234.3 219.6 74.3 623.1 2.1 14.2 21.5 13.2
Q2 1,384.9 164.4 234.1 219.4 78.0 637.6 2.0 14.1 21.5 13.8
Q3 1,400.1 159.2 233.8 214.8 87.7 654.6 1.9 13.4 20.8 13.8
Q4 1,411.1 152.4 231.9 211.8 93.4 669.1 1.7 14.6 21.9 14.3
2022 Q1 1,317.7 136.8 211.5 193.1 99.7 626.1 0.9 13.9 22.0 13.8
Q2 1,202.1 120.5 180.3 173.1 104.2 569.4 0.9 13.6 22.1 17.9
Q3 1,149.6 110.2 166.6 162.1 107.0 546.4 1.1 12.3 22.3 21.7
Q4 1,130.1 103.6 170.5 155.6 111.4 540.0 1.1 11.5 19.5 16.8
2023 Q1 1,147.9 105.1 170.4 155.6 113.3 553.4 1.0 12.1 19.4 17.5
Q2 1,153.6 102.8 171.7 154.9 114.3 559.4 1.0 12.1 19.3 18.1
Q3 1,120.8 97.6 162.9 149.1 115.7 545.2 1.5 11.8 19.1 18.0
    Non-life insurance
2021 Q1 721.2 108.1 140.2 83.6 88.7 218.9 0.4 40.0 12.8 28.6
Q2 724.6 103.3 141.0 83.4 90.5 225.7 0.4 40.3 12.7 27.2
Q3 733.1 98.7 141.0 83.8 93.7 228.4 0.4 46.4 12.8 27.7
Q4 738.4 94.6 140.1 84.7 97.5 234.3 0.3 44.6 14.0 28.4
2022 Q1 722.4 91.4 133.4 80.8 98.5 227.7 0.2 45.7 13.9 30.7
Q2 681.6 81.9 122.0 74.8 98.6 216.5 0.1 44.0 14.1 29.5
Q3 661.1 76.2 116.0 70.3 99.2 212.2 0.1 43.1 14.1 29.7
Q4 659.0 72.7 115.2 69.1 99.8 215.5 0.2 42.4 14.2 30.1
2023 Q1 687.2 81.3 121.2 69.5 102.7 219.8 0.1 45.2 14.2 33.2
Q2 687.1 77.2 123.9 70.3 103.1 222.4 0.1 45.1 14.1 30.9
Q3 679.3 73.5 122.3 68.6 104.5 221.1 0.1 45.5 14.3 29.3
    Reinsurance 4
2021 Q1 498.4 13.9 96.3 58.5 274.4 16.2 1.4 17.7 4.7 15.3
Q2 500.4 12.8 95.2 58.4 280.7 16.4 1.0 18.1 4.6 13.2
Q3 519.9 13.9 99.3 59.6 282.0 16.7 1.0 28.0 4.7 14.8
Q4 517.7 14.3 96.6 58.6 281.4 18.2 1.1 25.9 4.9 16.7
2022 Q1 507.1 15.5 95.3 59.3 270.4 16.7 1.6 27.9 5.0 15.3
Q2 486.0 13.2 88.0 57.5 259.6 17.6 1.9 27.9 5.1 15.1
Q3 485.5 15.6 87.3 56.7 255.1 18.1 2.7 28.8 5.1 16.2
Q4 485.6 13.2 88.0 55.0 254.6 16.7 2.1 25.7 5.0 25.3
2023 Q1 491.8 15.3 89.2 55.0 256.3 17.1 2.4 27.8 4.8 23.7
Q2 489.5 14.7 87.6 54.8 256.9 17.2 2.5 26.9 4.8 24.0
Q3 503.9 14.8 90.9 54.6 260.7 17.1 2.1 31.6 4.8 27.3
Pension funds 5
2021 Q1 664.3 86.1 58.7 48.6 10.8 427.9 0.2 12.1 17.6 2.3
Q2 683.2 85.0 60.2 49.3 11.2 445.2 0.1 12.1 17.8 2.3
Q3 689.8 82.9 60.4 48.9 11.8 453.6 0.1 12.2 17.8 2.2
Q4 709.9 82.1 60.0 48.7 11.2 473.5 0.1 12.4 18.5 3.3
2022 Q1 689.0 75.7 56.6 46.2 11.9 465.3 0.0 12.5 18.5 2.2
Q2 664.2 70.2 52.8 43.2 12.3 452.2 0.0 12.4 18.6 2.5
Q3 654.6 67.6 51.8 42.0 12.7 446.0 0.0 13.2 18.7 2.6
Q4 660.9 67.3 53.0 41.8 12.8 450.2 0.0 13.6 18.8 3.4
2023 Q1 666.3 65.8 56.6 42.0 13.6 453.5 0.0 13.5 18.8 2.6
Q2 674.7 67.9 59.1 42.6 13.7 456.5 0.0 13.5 18.9 2.5
Q3 669.9 67.3 59.8 42.0 14.0 451.5 0.1 13.4 19.1 2.6
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections.  1 Accounts receivable to monetary financial institutions, including
registered bonds, borrower's note loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including
deposits retained on assumed reinsurance as well as registered bonds, borrower's note
loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  3 Including reinsurance recoverables and claims ofpension funds on pension managers.  4 Not including the reinsurance business
conducted by primary insurers, which is included there.  5 The term "pension funds"
refers to the institutional sector "pension funds" of the European System of Accounts.
Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational pension
schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
49•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
2. Liabilities
€ billion
Technical reserves
End of
year/quarter TotalDebt
securities
issued Loans  1Shares and
other equity Total  2Life/
pension
entitlements  3 Non-lifeFinancial
derivativesRemaining
liabilities Net worth  6
Insurance corporations
2021 Q1 2,592.3 34.8 81.4 551.7 1,778.6 1,541.3 237.3 2.5 143.4 –
Q2 2,609.9 33.0 81.3 558.7 1,793.5 1,556.3 237.1 2.2 141.1 –
Q3 2,653.1 35.4 82.8 567.0 1,817.7 1,569.1 248.7 2.5 147.6 –
Q4 2,667.2 36.0 81.9 579.3 1,820.7 1,578.3 242.3 2.5 146.8 –
2022 Q1 2,547.3 34.4 82.1 563.1 1,725.9 1,472.6 253.3 4.0 137.7 –
Q2 2,369.7 33.6 78.7 541.6 1,574.4 1,326.8 247.5 6.0 135.3 –
Q3 2,296.2 33.8 73.6 537.4 1,506.0 1,262.3 243.7 7.4 138.0 –
Q4 2,274.7 32.3 70.1 543.7 1,486.5 1,248.7 237.8 5.6 136.5 –
2023 Q1 2,326.9 33.1 71.2 544.7 1,539.1 1,277.1 261.9 4.4 134.4 –
Q2 2,330.1 33.2 68.4 546.7 1,543.8 1,283.7 260.1 4.5 133.6 –
Q3 2,304.1 35.3 76.8 548.7 1,504.5 1,244.3 260.2 4.8 134.0 –
    Life insurance
2021 Q1 1,372.8 3.3 19.9 143.1 1,154.3 1,154.3 – 1.0 51.2 –
Q2 1,384.9 3.3 20.4 144.2 1,164.9 1,164.9 – 1.0 51.1 –
Q3 1,400.1 3.3 19.3 148.1 1,176.4 1,176.4 – 1.1 51.9 –
Q4 1,411.1 3.3 20.7 148.2 1,185.5 1,185.5 – 0.9 52.5 –
2022 Q1 1,317.7 3.2 19.9 142.9 1,101.6 1,101.6 – 1.4 48.8 –
Q2 1,202.1 3.1 19.0 141.4 984.5 984.5 – 2.7 51.3 –
Q3 1,149.6 3.0 17.0 138.0 936.9 936.9 – 3.1 51.8 –
Q4 1,130.1 2.7 16.6 136.0 924.9 924.9 – 2.3 47.7 –
2023 Q1 1,147.9 2.8 17.8 133.0 945.8 945.8 – 1.9 46.6 –
Q2 1,153.6 2.7 17.5 133.8 950.9 950.9 – 1.8 46.9 –
Q3 1,120.8 2.7 16.8 134.1 917.2 917.2 – 2.5 47.6 –
    Non-life insurance
2021 Q1 721.2 1.2 10.6 162.7 491.5 362.6 128.9 0.1 55.1 –
Q2 724.6 1.2 10.5 166.2 493.4 366.2 127.1 0.1 53.1 –
Q3 733.1 1.2 10.5 168.9 498.7 367.8 130.9 0.2 53.7 –
Q4 738.4 1.4 10.7 175.8 492.6 367.6 125.0 0.2 57.8 –
2022 Q1 722.4 1.3 11.7 173.1 483.0 347.1 135.9 0.3 53.0 –
Q2 681.6 1.2 11.1 167.6 451.9 322.7 129.2 0.5 49.2 –
Q3 661.1 1.2 10.5 167.9 430.4 307.4 123.0 0.5 50.5 –
Q4 659.0 1.2 10.4 170.2 425.1 306.7 118.4 0.4 51.7 –
2023 Q1 687.2 1.2 10.7 173.0 451.0 314.4 136.7 0.4 51.0 –
Q2 687.1 1.2 10.6 174.6 451.2 317.0 134.2 0.3 49.1 –
Q3 679.3 1.7 10.8 173.7 444.1 312.6 131.4 0.4 48.7 –
    Reinsurance 4
2021 Q1 498.4 30.2 50.9 245.8 132.8 24.4 108.4 1.4 37.2 –
Q2 500.4 28.5 50.4 248.3 135.2 25.2 110.0 1.1 36.9 –
Q3 519.9 30.9 53.0 250.1 142.7 24.9 117.8 1.3 42.0 –
Q4 517.7 31.4 50.5 255.3 142.6 25.3 117.3 1.4 36.5 –
2022 Q1 507.1 30.0 50.4 247.2 141.3 23.9 117.4 2.3 35.9 –
Q2 486.0 29.3 48.6 232.6 138.0 19.6 118.4 2.8 34.7 –
Q3 485.5 29.7 46.2 231.5 138.7 18.0 120.7 3.8 35.7 –
Q4 485.6 28.4 43.1 237.5 136.5 17.1 119.4 2.9 37.1 –
2023 Q1 491.8 29.2 42.8 238.7 142.2 17.0 125.3 2.1 36.8 –
Q2 489.5 29.3 40.2 238.3 141.7 15.8 125.9 2.4 37.6 –
Q3 503.9 31.0 49.2 241.0 143.3 14.5 128.7 1.9 37.7 –
Pension funds 5
2021 Q1 664.3 – 1.7 29.1 530.3 529.2 – 0.3 9.0 94.0
Q2 683.2 – 1.8 31.3 536.7 535.0 – 0.2 9.2 104.0
Q3 689.8 – 1.9 31.9 539.8 537.6 – 0.2 9.3 106.8
Q4 709.9 – 1.9 32.0 560.2 557.3 – 0.1 8.9 106.8
2022 Q1 689.0 – 2.0 26.8 559.0 556.8 – 0.1 11.2 89.9
Q2 664.2 – 1.8 23.4 559.7 558.1 – 0.1 11.6 67.7
Q3 654.6 – 1.9 21.2 561.1 560.2 – 0.1 13.0 57.2
Q4 660.9 – 1.8 24.3 580.8 580.5 – 0.1 11.5 42.5
2023 Q1 666.3 – 1.8 24.8 580.2 579.9 – 0.1 11.5 47.9
Q2 674.7 – 1.8 24.7 585.6 585.3 – 0.1 11.6 50.9
Q3 669.9 – 1.8 24.8 586.6 586.3 – 0.1 11.7 45.0
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections.  1 Including deposits retained on ceded business as well as registered
bonds, borrower's note loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including claims of pension
funds on pension managers and entitlements to non-pension benefits.  3 Technical
reserves "life" taking account of transitional measures. Health insurance is also includedin the "non-life insurance" sector.  4 Not including the reinsurance business conducted
by primary insurers, which is included there.  5 Valuation at book values. The term "pen-
sion funds" refers to the institutional sector "pension funds" of the European System of
Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational
pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included.  6 Own
funds correspond to the sum of "Net worth" and "Shares and other equity".

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
50•
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases TotalBank
debt
securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt
secur-
itiesForeign
debt
secur-
ities  3 Total  4Credit in-
stitutions
including
building
and loan
associations  5Deutsche
BundesbankOther
sectors  6Non-
residents  7
2012 51,813 –21,419 –98,820 – 8,701 86,103 73,231 – 3,767 – 42,017 – 3,573 41,823 55,581
2013 – 15,971 –101,616 –117,187 153 15,415 85,645 16,409 – 25,778 – 12,708 54,895 – 32,379
2014 58,735 –31,962 –47,404 – 1,330 16,776 90,697 44,384 – 12,124 – 11,951 68,459 14,351
2015 15,219 –36,010 –65,778 26,762 3,006 51,229 99,225 – 66,330 121,164 44,391 – 84,006
2016 68,998 27,429 19,177 18,265 –10,012 41,569 161,776 – 58,012 187,500 32,288 – 92,778
2017 51,034 11,563 1,096 7,112 3,356 39,471 134,192 – 71,454 161,012 44,634 – 83,158
2018 78,657 16,630 33,251 12,433 –29,055 62,027 107,155 – 24,417 67,328 64,244 – 28,499
2019 139,611 68,536 29,254 32,505 6,778 71,075 60,195 8,059 2,408 49,728 79,416
2020 451,409 374,034 14,462 88,703 270,870 77,374 285,318 18,955 226,887 39,476 166,091
2021 233,453 221,648 31,941 19,754 169,953 11,805 255,702 – 41,852 245,198 52,356 – 22,249
2022 155,940 156,190 59,322 35,221 61,648 – 219 155,609 2,915 49,774 102,920 331
2023 288,670 158,295 88,161 –11,974 82,109 130,374 131,514 32,140 – 59,817 159,192 157,155
2023 Jan. 58,333 26,856 19,250 4,335 3,270 31,477 41,346 10,522 7,783 23,041 16,987
Feb. 24,581 11,680 5,466 – 1,673 7,886 12,901 25,280 13,504 – 4,961 16,736 – 699
Mar. 59,563 39,989 22,802 – 1,704 18,892 19,573 18,732 8,063 – 1,710 12,379 40,831
Apr. 8,074 – 4,404 – 1,130 – 3,176 – 97 12,477 12,253 – 747 – 13,293 26,292 – 4,179
May 49,437 34,077 28,468 3,010 2,599 15,359 12,041 1,206 – 1,655 12,490 37,395
June 44,247 22,910 – 6,490 5,312 24,089 21,337 38,527 16,773 – 8,853 30,607 5,720
July 25,644 27,889 981 – 79 26,987 – 2,245 – 629 – 8,514 324 7,561 26,273
Aug. 14,632 10,967 10,278 – 1,708 2,397 3,665 975 503 – 9,067 9,539 13,657
Sep. 16,575 16,310 – 7,089 6,461 16,938 265 – 5,420 – 8,020 – 11,311 13,912 21,995
Oct. – 20,618 –19,390 1,677 –10,955 –10,113 – 1,227 – 13,082 – 4,855 – 6,759 – 1,468 – 7,536
Nov. 28,453 18,861 9,439 – 3,337 12,759 9,592 9,557 10,752 – 5,186 3,992 18,896
Dec. – 20,251 –27,450 4,510 – 8,461 –23,499 7,199 – 8,067 – 7,047 – 5,130 4,110 – 12,185
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
purchasesDomestic
shares  8Foreign
shares  9 Total  10Credit insti-
tutions  5 Other sectors  11Non-
residents  12
2012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 656
2013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,337 11,991 5,346 2,851
2014 43,488 18,778 24,710 43,930 17,203 26,727 – 443
2015 56,979 7,668 49,311 46,721 – 5,421 52,142 10,258
2016 39,133 4,409 34,724 39,265 – 5,143 44,408 – 132
2017 52,932 15,570 37,362 51,270 7,031 44,239 1,662
2018 61,400 16,188 45,212 89,624 – 11,184 100,808 – 28,224
2019 54,830 9,076 45,754 43,070 – 1,119 44,189 11,759
2020 72,321 17,771 54,550 105,483 27 105,456 – 33,162
2021 115,746 49,066 66,681 102,927 10,869 92,058 12,819
2022 – 7,067 27,792 – 34,858 161 – 8,262 8,423 – 7,228
2023 39,104 36,898 2,206 49,307 14,650 34,657 – 10,203
2023 Jan. 6,525 133 6,393 8,105 2,935 5,170 – 1,580
Feb. 4,863 2,371 2,492 6,098 4,494 1,604 – 1,235
Mar. – 1,346 1,696 – 3,042 650 1,985 – 1,335 – 1,996
Apr. 5,001 2,576 2,426 6,321 3,235 3,086 – 1,320
May – 708 592 – 1,299 377 – 2,497 2,874 – 1,084
June – 4,220 1,067 – 5,287 – 278 – 3,322 3,044 – 3,942
July 4,330 478 3,852 1,499 – 136 1,635 2,831
Aug. 440 1,474 – 1,034 3,509 – 893 4,402 – 3,069
Sep. – 4,807 687 – 5,495 – 3,719 1,962 – 5,681 – 1,088
Oct. 405 583 – 178 2,756 – 88 2,844 – 2,351
Nov. 591 301 290 – 2,437 538 – 2,975 3,028
Dec. 28,031 24,942 3,088 26,427 6,437 19,990 1,604
1 Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers' portfolios of their own debt
securities.  2 Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction values.
4 Domestic and foreign debt securities.  5 Book values; statistically adjusted.  6 Residual;
also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.
Up to end-2008 including Deutsche Bundesbank.  7 Net purchases or net sales (-) of do-
mestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction values.  8 Excluding shares of publiclimited investment companies; at issue prices.  9 Net purchases or net sales (-) of foreign
shares (including direct investment) by residents; transaction values.  10 Domestic
and foreign shares.  11 Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign
securities by domestic mutual funds.  12 Net purchases or net sales (-) of domestic
shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The figures
for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
51•
VIII. Capital market
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities  1
Period Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by special-
purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt securities
Gross sales
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,258 574,530
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,892
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,675 400,701
3 2016 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,371 416,108
3 2017 1,047,822 619,199 30,339 8,933 438,463 141,466 66,290 362,332
2018 1,148,091 703,416 38,658 5,673 534,552 124,530 91,179 353,496
2019 1,285,541 783,977 38,984 9,587 607,900 127,504 94,367 407,197
6 2020 1,870,084 778,411 39,548 18,327 643,380 77,156 184,206 907,466
2021 1,658,004 795,271 41,866 17,293 648,996 87,116 139,775 722,958
2022 1,683,265 861,989 66,811 11,929 700,062 83,188 169,680 651,596
2023 1,705,061 937,292 45,073 12,633 782,969 96,618 153,129 614,639
2023 Mar. 190,528 99,938 1,252 60 89,786 8,840 11,158 79,431
Apr. 129,401 69,020 2,954 543 60,740 4,783 10,608 49,772
May 169,866 97,645 4,531 760 83,511 8,844 16,336 55,885
June 171,957 84,953 3,264 1,556 70,601 9,532 21,526 65,478
July 121,578 53,812 2,876 130 43,776 7,031 14,133 53,632
Aug. 142,211 82,749 3,085 1,013 71,729 6,922 10,064 49,397
Sep. 152,408 82,679 3,337 550 71,155 7,637 18,722 51,007
Oct. 132,402 83,350 1,697 2,557 71,328 7,769 10,151 38,901
Nov. 125,657 72,915 7,203 1,354 57,521 6,837 8,850 43,892
Dec. 80,561 54,536 1,834 1,453 46,549 4,699 4,723 21,302
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years 4
2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888
2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765
2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
3 2016 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
3 2017 357,506 170,357 22,395 6,447 94,852 46,663 44,891 142,257
2018 375,906 173,995 30,934 4,460 100,539 38,061 69,150 132,760
2019 396,617 174,390 26,832 6,541 96,673 44,346 69,682 152,544
6 2020 658,521 165,097 28,500 7,427 90,839 38,330 77,439 415,985
2021 486,335 171,799 30,767 6,336 97,816 36,880 64,234 250,303
2022 485,287 164,864 41,052 7,139 91,143 25,530 56,491 263,932
2023 481,885 155,482 28,294 4,664 101,059 21,464 44,272 282,132
2023 Mar. 46,975 14,091 1,147 – 11,809 1,136 1,658 31,225
Apr. 33,709 10,326 2,769 500 6,367 690 2,683 20,700
May 49,315 14,703 2,898 – 9,458 2,347 4,527 30,085
June 53,960 12,885 2,664 498 9,123 600 10,475 30,600
July 34,145 10,133 430 2 7,964 1,736 2,298 21,715
Aug. 36,582 12,501 2,383 1,000 8,182 936 1,656 22,425
Sep. 40,995 8,847 2,250 – 5,127 1,470 8,741 23,407
Oct. 37,642 15,411 262 20 11,876 3,253 2,456 19,775
Nov. 35,532 13,641 6,703 600 4,135 2,203 2,541 19,350
Dec. 14,455 6,093 1,040 1,205 2,551 1,296 763 7,600
Net sales 5
2012 – 85,298 – 100,198 – 4,177 – 41,660 – 3,259 – 51,099 – 6,401 21,298
2013 – 140,017 – 125,932 – 17,364 – 37,778 – 4,027 – 66,760 1,394 – 15,479
2014 – 34,020 – 56,899 – 6,313 – 23,856 – 862 – 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 – 65,147 – 77,273 9,271 – 9,754 – 2,758 – 74,028 25,300 – 13,174
3 2016 21,951 10,792 2,176 – 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 – 7,020
3 2017 2,669 5,954 6,389 – 4,697 18,788 – 14,525 6,828 – 10,114
2018 2,758 26,648 19,814 – 6,564 18,850 – 5,453 9,738 – 33,630
2019 59,719 28,750 13,098 – 3,728 26,263 – 6,885 30,449 519
6 2020 473,795 28,147 8,661 8,816 22,067 – 11,398 49,536 396,113
2021 210,231 52,578 17,821 7,471 22,973 4,314 35,531 122,123
2022 135,853 36,883 23,894 – 9,399 15,944 6,444 30,671 68,299
2023 190,631 78,874 10,189 – 791 46,069 23,408 – 91 111,848
2023 Mar. 46,022 19,989 – 2,032 – 1,517 18,332 5,206 – 1,614 27,647
Apr. – 26,464 – 2,812 1,244 – 5 – 3,074 – 976 – 3,714 – 19,938
May 40,674 26,575 1,932 254 20,562 3,826 2,259 11,840
June 25,517 – 7,752 – 509 11 – 9,065 1,811 7,559 25,710
July 30,229 700 – 53 110 – 502 1,146 – 734 30,263
Aug. 15,869 9,610 2,930 541 7,387 – 1,249 – 1,791 8,050
Sep. 12,991 – 6,384 28 – 809 – 4,706 – 897 8,074 11,300
Oct. – 7,927 – 1,596 – 2,527 – 1,529 – 895 3,356 – 2,197 – 4,135
Nov. 30,649 13,427 4,984 904 7,149 391 – 4,018 21,239
Dec. – 11,163 10,412 313 1,288 9,314 – 503 – 4,930 – 16,644
* For definitions, see the explanatory notes in Statistical Series - Securities Issues
Statistics on pages 43 f.  1 Excluding registered bank debt securities.  2 Including
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Sectoral reclassification of
debt securities.  4 Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue.  5 Gross sales lessredemptions.  6 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year
2020 have been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions
are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
52•
VIII. Capital market
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities
End of year
or month/
Maturity
in years Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by
special-purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)Public
debt securities
2012 3,285,422 1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
1 2016 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
1 2017 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 651,211 320,432 2 302,543 1,617,244
2018 3,091,303 1,194,160 161,088 51,439 670,062 1 311,572 1 2 313,527 1,583,616
2019 2 3,149,373 1,222,911 174,188 47,712 696,325 304,686 2 342,325 1,584,136
4 2020 2 3,545,200 2 1,174,817 183,980 55,959 687,710 2 247,169 2 379,342 1,991,040
2021 3,781,975 1,250,777 202,385 63,496 731,068 253,828 414,791 2,116,406
2022 3,930,390 1,302,028 225,854 54,199 761,047 260,928 441,234 2,187,127
2023 4,129,861 1,383,221 237,104 54,312 806,674 285,130 441,748 2,304,892
2023 Feb. 3,963,852 1,320,844 229,851 54,180 764,148 272,666 442,389 2,200,618
Mar. 4,005,403 1,335,447 227,451 52,890 777,696 277,410 440,399 2,229,557
Apr. 3,977,194 1,330,812 228,764 52,910 772,714 276,424 436,591 2,209,790
May 4,027,974 1,364,889 230,966 53,237 799,875 280,811 439,299 2,223,786
June 4,052,214 1,354,415 230,474 53,223 788,438 282,281 446,780 2,251,019
July 4,077,718 1,354,010 231,454 53,389 786,384 282,783 446,064 2,277,644
Aug. 4,095,643 1,365,614 234,566 53,961 795,808 281,279 444,711 2,285,319
Sep. 4,117,795 1,365,365 234,599 53,128 796,782 280,856 453,037 2,299,393
Oct. 4,110,219 1,362,975 231,537 52,084 794,730 284,623 450,654 2,296,591
Nov. 4,139,444 1,373,679 236,596 53,034 798,461 285,588 446,199 2,319,566
Dec. 4,129,861 1,383,221 237,104 54,312 806,674 285,130 441,748 2,304,892
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity 3 Position at end-December 2023
bis unter 2   1 248 699   514 413   65 036   17 931   334 093   97 352   83 088   651 198 
 2 bis unter 4    786 137   329 344   71 666   14 560   171 291   71 827   81 069   375 724 
 4 bis unter 6    603 937   227 317   47 358   10 841   126 543   42 574   65 354   311 266 
6 bis unter 8    419 011   120 196   22 201   4 125   68 161   25 708   44 464   254 352 
 8 bis unter 10    305 388   90 655   19 437   2 791   52 249   16 177   28 924   185 809 
 10 bis unter 15    240 457   54 627   7 294   3 746   35 081   8 505   27 726   158 105 
 15 bis unter 20    114 059   15 576   3 341    231   9 896   2 108   15 023   83 460 
 20 und darüber    412 171   31 093    769    86   9 359   20 879   96 100   284 978 
* Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers' portfolios.  1 Sectoral
reclassification of debt securities.  2 Adjustments due to the change in the country of
residence of the issuers or debt securities.  3 Calculated from month under review until
final maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of theresidual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc.
4 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year 2020 have
been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions are not
specially marked.
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies' capital due to
PeriodShare capital =
circulation at
end of period
under reviewNet increase or
net decrease (-)
during period
under reviewcash payments
and ex-
change of
convertible
bonds  1issue of
bonus sharescontribution
of claims
and other
real assetsmerger
and
transfer
of assetschange of
legal formreduction
of capital 
and
liquidationMemo item:
Share circulation
at market values
(market capita-
lisation)
level at end
of period
under review  2
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 – 478 594 – 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 – 6,879 2,971 718 476 – 1,432 – 619 – 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 – 465 – 1,044 – 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 – 1,394 – 1,385 – 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 – 1,062 3,272 319 337 – 953 – 2,165 – 1,865 1,676,397
2017 178,828 2,471 3,894 776 533 – 457 – 661 – 1,615 1,933,733
2018 180,187 1,357 3,670 716 82 – 1,055 – 1,111 – 946 1,634,155
3 4 2019 183,461 1,673 2,411 2,419 542 – 858 – 65 – 2,775 1,950,224
4 2020 181,881 – 2,872 1,877 219 178 – 2,051 – 460 – 2,635 1,963,588
2021 186,580 4,152 9,561 672 35 – 326 – 212 – 5,578 2,301,942
2022 199,789 12,272 14,950 224 371 – 29 – 293 – 2,952 1,858,963
2023 182,246 – 15,984 3,377 3 50 – 564 – 2,515 – 16,335 2,051,675
2023 Mar. 198,157 – 185 178 – – – –– 363 2,080,189
Apr. 198,426 267 431 – –– 0 – 6 – 157 2,086,578
May 198,497 71 153 – –– 0 –– 82 2,048,166
June 198,505 8 422 – –– 262 – 17 – 135 2,061,065
July 198,406 – 99 52 – –– 0 – 89 – 62 2,113,570
Aug. 198,654 210 452 – –– 1 – 24 – 217 2,038,560
Sep. 198,328 – 325 280 3 –– 201 – 10 – 397 1,966,858
Oct. 198,522 194 504 – –– 100 – 2 – 208 1,852,180
Nov. 198,456 – 67 62 0 0 0 0 – 129 2,002,568
Dec. 182,246 – 16,210 677 0 0 0 – 2,366 – 14,521 2,051,675
* Excluding shares of public limited investment companies.  1 Including shares issued
out of company profits.  2 All marketplaces. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on
data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mit teilungen and Deutsche BörseAG. 3 Methodological changes since October 2019.  4 Changes due to statistical
adjustments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
53•
VIII. Capital market
5. Yields on German securities
Issue yields Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1
Public debt securities Public debt securities Bank debt securities
Listed Federal securities
Total Totalof which:
Listed Federal
debt securitiesBank debt 
securities Total Total TotalWith a residual
maturity of
 9 to
10 years  2 TotalWith a residual
maturity of more
than 9 years and
up to 10 yearsCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)
Period % per annum
2012 1.6 1.3 1.2 1.8 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7
2013 1.6 1.3 1.2 1.8 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4
2014 1.2 1.1 0.9 1.3 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0
2015 0.7 0.4 0.4 0.7 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4
2016 0.4 0.1 – 0.1 0.6 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1
2017 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.6 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7
2018 0.7 0.6 0.4 0.6 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 1.0 2.5
2019 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.3 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 0.1 0.3 2.5
2020 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.5 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.0 0.1 1.7
2021 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.3 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.1 0.2 0.9
2022 1.6 1.3 1.2 1.9 1.5 1.2 1.1 1.1 1.9 1.9 3.3
2023 2.9 2.6 2.5 3.4 2.9 2.6 2.5 2.4 3.3 3.2 4.2
2023 May 2.80 2.41 2.41 3.16 2.82 2.50 2.37 2.34 3.26 3.11 4.17
June 2.89 2.55 2.55 3.31 2.88 2.58 2.46 2.38 3.32 3.12 4.24
July 2.98 2.61 2.61 3.64 2.97 2.67 2.55 2.46 3.43 3.24 4.25
Aug. 2.92 2.58 2.58 3.42 3.01 2.71 2.60 2.55 3.44 3.31 4.27
Sep. 3.18 2.75 2.75 3.57 3.11 2.82 2.71 2.66 3.51 3.42 4.39
Oct. 3.18 2.86 2.86 3.66 3.25 2.96 2.84 2.82 3.66 3.63 4.56
Nov. 3.01 2.61 2.61 3.53 3.02 2.75 2.64 2.60 3.40 3.37 4.23
Dec. 3.01 2.44 2.44 3.67 2.52 2.26 2.15 2.10 2.91 2.92 3.63
1 Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of
over 4 years. Structured debt securities, debt securities with unscheduled redemption,
zero coupon bonds, floating rate notes and bonds not denominated in Euro are not
included. Group yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the
amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figuresare calculated on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual
figures are the unweighted means of the monthly figures. Adjustment of the scope of
securities included on 1 May 2020.  2 Only debt securities eligible as underlying
instruments for futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages.
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds  1 (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the
general publicCredit institutions
including building
and loan associations  2 Other sectors  3
of which:
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases Total TotalMoney
market
fundsSecur-
ities-
based
fundsReal
estate
fundsSpecial-
ised
fundsForeign
funds  4 Total Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
shares Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
sharesNon-resi-
dents  5
2012 111,236 89,942 2,084 –1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 –3,062 –1,562 117,738 22,855 –3,437
2013 123,736 91,337 9,184 – 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,710
2014 137,294 97,711 3,998 – 473 862 1,000 93,713 39,583 141,134 819 –1,745 140,315 41,328 –3,841
2015 189,802 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 43,665 181,932 7,362 494 174,570 43,171 7,870
2016 149,288 119,369 21,301 – 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 29,919 156,236 2,877 –3,172 153,359 33,091 –6,948
2017 148,214 94,921 29,560 – 235 21,970 4,406 65,361 53,292 150,740 4,938 1,048 145,802 52,244 –2,526
2018 108,293 103,694 15,279 377 4,166 6,168 88,415 4,599 114,973 2,979 –2,306 111,994 6,905 –6,680
2019 171,666 122,546 17,032 – 447 5,097 10,580 105,514 49,120 176,210 2,719 – 812 173,491 49,932 –4,544
2020 151,960 116,028 19,193 – 42 11,343 8,795 96,835 35,932 150,998 336 –1,656 150,662 37,588 962
2021 274,261 157,861 41,016 482 31,023 7,841 116,845 116,401 282,694 13,154 254 269,540 116,147 –8,433
2022 112,637 79,022 6,057 482 444 5,071 72,991 33,614 115,872 3,170 –1,459 112,702 35,073 –3,235
2023 71,842 44,484 5,969 460 4,951 723 38,461 27,358 73,795 –4,683 –2,054 78,478 29,412 –1,953
2023 May 8,348 6,261 1,228 – 144 1,301 21 5,035 2,087 8,074 – 49 42 8,123 2,045 274
June –1,800 –2,213 – 312 – 31 – 628 271 –1,901 413 – 437 85 – 19 – 522 432 –1,363
July 11,189 6,405 433 280 69 90 5,972 4,784 12,136 – 437 – 167 12,573 4,951 – 947
Aug. 5,374 4,731 13 115 – 107 – 40 4,720 643 5,225 132 – 129 5,093 772 149
Sep. 5,670 2,115 702 61 785 – 115 1,411 3,555 6,464 362 106 6,102 3,449 – 793
Oct. –2,604 –2,394 –1,269 – 130 – 843 – 139 –1,186 – 210 –2,713 814 – 113 –3,527 – 97 109
Nov. 219 –3,273 592 93 807 – 276 –3,865 3,493 1,322 95 – 288 1,227 3,781 –1,102
Dec. 10,428 10,971 –1,536 156 –1,448 – 182 12,506 – 543 9,666 84 13 9,582 – 556 762
1 Including public limited investment companies.  2 Book values.  3 Residual.  4 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values.  5 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of domestic fund shares by non-residents; transaction values.— The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
54•
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2022 2023
 Item 2020 2021 2022 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 96.82 46.19 67.90 –26.90 51.95 28.96 –25.80 –13.01 24.26
   Debt securities 2.99 2.81 4.10 –0.10 3.52 0.05 4.49 1.79 1.56
     Short-term debt securities 1.27 2.29 1.23 –1.94 3.00 –0.22 2.00 1.08 –0.06
     Long-term debt securities 1.72 0.52 2.87 1.84 0.52 0.26 2.49 0.71 1.62
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 1.38 1.31 3.40 0.98 1.65 0.43 3.81 2.76 0.49
         Non-financial corporations –0.17 0.72 0.86 –0.17 0.74 0.13 0.76 –0.34 –0.47
         Financial corporations 0.12 1.08 1.79 0.73 0.66 –0.04 1.43 1.44 0.33
         General government 1.44 –0.48 0.74 0.43 0.25 0.34 1.63 1.66 0.63
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 1.61 1.50 0.70 –1.08 1.88 –0.38 0.68 –0.98 1.07
   Loans –7.34 63.05 44.18 16.30 31.37 –7.78 28.55 13.87 18.70
     Short-term loans –4.27 44.68 27.96 12.28 27.97 –14.97 20.00 11.12 16.14
     Long-term loans –3.07 18.37 16.22 4.02 3.40 7.19 8.55 2.75 2.56
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors –0.10 10.13 23.00 2.92 14.54 –2.72 37.02 9.58 17.54
         Non-financial corporations –12.27 7.11 23.94 5.52 8.47 7.51 29.88 7.51 14.72
         Financial corporations 11.58 2.38 –1.29 –2.68 5.98 –10.31 7.13 2.07 2.83
         General government 0.58 0.64 0.34 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.00 0.00 0.00
       Loans to the rest of the world –7.24 52.92 21.18 13.39 16.83 –5.07 –8.47 4.29 1.16
   Equity and investment fund shares 101.16 166.47 117.12 47.23 2.49 27.17 –0.22 31.76 19.87
     Equity 88.39 144.71 117.07 49.04 4.73 25.17 –0.94 30.01 18.77
       Listed shares of domestic sectors –77.97 15.33 44.06 7.40 34.33 –3.71 –10.51 –0.27 4.73
         Non-financial corporations –78.06 16.89 43.79 7.12 34.91 –3.82 –10.45 –0.32 5.07
         Financial corporations 0.09 –1.56 0.27 0.28 –0.58 0.11 –0.07 0.05 –0.34
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 5.01 8.32 4.98 3.61 0.30 3.10 –7.56 0.62 –9.05
       Other equity  1 161.34 121.06 68.04 38.04 –29.90 25.78 17.13 29.65 23.10
     Investment fund shares 12.78 21.77 0.05 –1.82 –2.24 1.99 0.72 1.75 1.10
       Money market fund shares 3.79 0.66 –0.38 –0.42 –1.12 2.37 –0.80 –0.41 0.59
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 8.99 21.11 0.43 –1.40 –1.12 –0.38 1.52 2.15 0.51
   Insurance technical reserves 0.37 18.01 1.64 –1.19 –1.00 –1.18 6.38 –1.01 –1.19
   Financial derivatives –27.54 15.54 28.86 28.28 10.09 –30.78 4.22 0.97 14.15
   Other accounts receivable 55.69 62.27 25.28 –33.92 –57.00 130.87 89.49 –8.81 –53.03
   Total 222.16 374.33 289.07 29.70 41.42 147.30 107.10 25.55 24.32
 External financing
   Debt securities 36.89 20.86 14.16 3.77 1.37 –1.93 1.38 2.44 1.57
     Short-term securities –4.40 2.51 –0.36 1.21 –2.73 –2.69 –0.16 –0.70 –0.84
       Long-term securities 41.29 18.35 14.52 2.56 4.10 0.76 1.54 3.14 2.41
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 18.06 9.11 5.85 1.62 0.19 –1.61 1.72 0.52 0.55
           Non-financial corporations –0.17 0.72 0.86 –0.17 0.74 0.13 0.76 –0.34 –0.47
           Financial corporations 19.80 9.09 4.46 1.86 –0.75 –1.99 0.40 –0.26 –0.10
           General government –0.22 0.09 –0.07 –0.08 0.01 0.01 –0.00 –0.07 –0.04
           Households –1.35 –0.79 0.60 0.01 0.19 0.24 0.57 1.18 1.16
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 18.83 11.75 8.31 2.15 1.18 –0.32 –0.35 1.93 1.02
   Loans 96.70 135.14 188.11 40.98 80.04 32.92 15.85 32.32 2.14
     Short-term loans –2.81 81.64 85.19 21.69 47.79 –12.53 4.34 16.12 –0.23
     Long-term loans 99.51 53.50 102.92 19.29 32.25 45.45 11.51 16.19 2.37
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 38.35 76.93 164.55 36.11 72.30 18.84 49.46 18.66 9.14
         Non-financial corporations –12.27 7.11 23.94 5.52 8.47 7.51 29.88 7.51 14.72
         Financial corporations 14.97 56.66 119.57 27.63 37.17 21.65 27.49 15.90 –0.04
         General government 35.65 13.16 21.04 2.96 26.66 –10.33 –7.91 –4.75 –5.54
       Loans from the rest of the world 58.34 58.21 23.55 4.87 7.73 14.08 –33.61 13.65 –7.00
   Equity 60.37 61.44 14.81 8.99 3.48 –0.77 –6.03 3.51 5.37
     Listed shares of domestic sectors –62.25 26.44 57.01 10.14 33.32 0.59 –14.05 –5.07 2.64
       Non-financial corporations –78.06 16.89 43.79 7.12 34.91 –3.82 –10.45 –0.32 5.07
       Financial corporations 3.46 –2.39 2.17 –1.43 –4.47 2.89 –0.67 –4.55 –1.18
       General government 0.26 –0.09 0.76 0.24 0.25 0.10 –1.18 –0.21 –0.05
       Households 12.08 12.04 10.29 4.21 2.63 1.42 –1.75 0.00 –1.20
     Listed shares of the rest of the world 10.09 18.88 –9.47 –2.10 8.05 –2.62 2.29 7.32 0.91
     Other equity  1 112.54 16.11 –32.73 0.95 –37.89 1.26 5.72 1.26 1.82
   Insurance technical reserves 5.83 4.26 3.53 0.88 0.88 0.89 0.88 0.88 0.88
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.54 14.32 –14.10 –0.27 1.80 –13.34 1.58 2.08 2.72
   Other accounts payable 23.46 138.61 65.83 12.43 20.81 18.36 10.94 4.38 0.33
   Total 223.80 374.63 272.34 66.78 108.37 36.13 24.59 45.60 13.02
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
55•
IX. Financial accounts
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2022 2023
 Item 2020 2021 2022 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 717.4 727.5 795.3 698.7 767.4 795.3 744.3 652.6 730.3
   Debt securities 51.5 54.3 53.8 51.3 53.7 53.8 58.9 60.4 61.9
     Short-term debt securities 4.8 7.1 8.4 5.6 8.6 8.4 10.4 11.3 11.3
     Long-term debt securities 46.7 47.2 45.5 45.7 45.0 45.5 48.5 49.1 50.6
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 22.1 23.3 24.7 23.0 24.1 24.7 28.7 31.4 31.8
         Non-financial corporations 4.7 5.3 5.8 4.9 5.5 5.8 6.5 6.2 5.7
         Financial corporations 13.4 14.5 15.0 14.7 14.9 15.0 16.6 18.0 18.3
         General government 4.0 3.5 3.9 3.5 3.6 3.9 5.6 7.2 7.8
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 29.4 31.0 29.2 28.2 29.6 29.2 30.2 29.0 30.1
   Loans 725.1 780.5 827.2 806.5 840.9 827.2 855.2 869.0 889.1
     Short-term loans 571.1 611.2 640.8 629.8 660.0 640.8 660.1 670.7 687.8
     Long-term loans 154.1 169.3 186.4 176.7 180.9 186.4 195.1 198.3 201.3
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 412.5 422.6 445.6 433.8 448.3 445.6 482.6 492.2 509.7
         Non-financial corporations 327.6 334.7 358.7 342.7 351.1 358.7 388.5 396.0 410.8
         Financial corporations 76.9 79.3 78.0 82.4 88.3 78.0 85.2 87.2 90.1
         General government 7.9 8.6 8.9 8.8 8.8 8.9 8.9 8.9 8.9
       Loans to the rest of the world 312.7 357.9 381.6 372.7 392.6 381.6 372.6 376.8 379.3
   Equity and investment fund shares 2,567.8 2,860.0 2,618.4 2,700.9 2,670.7 2,618.4 2,692.0 2,714.2 2,660.6
     Equity 2,363.1 2,619.8 2,405.8 2,483.4 2,458.8 2,405.8 2,473.4 2,488.8 2,435.1
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 307.0 393.0 331.8 305.0 307.5 331.8 361.1 354.8 330.1
         Non-financial corporations 298.9 384.9 324.5 298.2 301.7 324.5 353.9 347.0 322.9
         Financial corporations 8.1 8.0 7.4 6.8 5.7 7.4 7.2 7.8 7.2
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 66.6 74.7 72.2 68.7 67.5 72.2 66.9 67.1 57.5
       Other equity  1 1,989.5 2,152.2 2,001.8 2,109.7 2,083.9 2,001.8 2,045.3 2,066.8 2,047.4
     Investment fund shares 204.7 240.2 212.6 217.5 211.9 212.6 218.6 225.4 225.6
       Money market fund shares 7.0 7.6 7.2 6.0 4.9 7.2 6.5 6.1 6.8
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 197.8 232.6 205.4 211.5 207.0 205.4 212.1 219.3 218.8
   Insurance technical reserves 62.1 64.8 41.0 45.2 42.9 41.0 47.3 46.4 45.5
   Financial derivatives 30.9 106.0 92.2 164.4 199.0 92.2 65.6 56.9 44.7
   Other accounts receivable 1,242.9 1,452.5 1,518.7 1,515.8 1,528.5 1,518.7 1,574.3 1,572.1 1,600.4
   Total 5,397.9 6,045.6 5,946.7 5,982.8 6,103.1 5,946.7 6,037.6 5,971.7 6,032.4
 Liabilities
   Debt securities 238.3 252.3 228.7 229.7 226.7 228.7 231.2 234.8 234.8
     Short-term securities 7.1 9.6 9.3 14.7 12.0 9.3 9.1 8.4 7.5
     Long-term securities 231.2 242.7 219.4 215.1 214.7 219.4 222.1 226.4 227.3
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 96.1 100.6 90.9 92.5 90.3 90.9 93.4 94.0 93.5
         Non-financial corporations 4.7 5.3 5.8 4.9 5.5 5.8 6.5 6.2 5.7
         Financial corporations 78.2 83.2 73.4 76.7 73.8 73.4 74.4 74.3 73.3
         General government 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.2
         Households 12.8 11.8 11.4 10.6 10.7 11.4 12.2 13.3 14.3
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 142.3 151.7 137.8 137.2 136.4 137.8 137.7 140.8 141.3
   Loans 2,269.5 2,401.7 2,593.9 2,483.5 2,570.7 2,593.9 2,607.8 2,633.3 2,638.7
     Short-term loans 830.0 903.3 991.9 958.5 1,010.9 991.9 994.2 1,010.6 1,011.7
     Long-term loans 1,439.5 1,498.4 1,602.1 1,525.0 1,559.8 1,602.1 1,613.6 1,622.7 1,627.0
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 1,390.7 1,468.8 1,633.7 1,540.6 1,614.3 1,633.7 1,680.1 1,698.1 1,709.1
         Non-financial corporations 327.6 334.7 358.7 342.7 351.1 358.7 388.5 396.0 410.8
         Financial corporations 961.3 1,019.4 1,139.6 1,078.8 1,117.4 1,139.6 1,163.9 1,179.1 1,181.1
         General government 101.9 114.7 135.5 119.1 145.8 135.5 127.8 122.9 117.2
       Loans from the rest of the world 878.8 932.9 960.2 942.9 956.4 960.2 927.7 935.3 929.6
   Equity 3,260.9 3,689.0 2,981.1 2,994.2 2,843.1 2,981.1 3,264.2 3,259.2 3,100.7
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 739.9 924.8 761.4 733.9 691.4 761.4 855.9 821.8 762.7
       Non-financial corporations 298.9 384.9 324.5 298.2 301.7 324.5 353.9 347.0 322.9
       Financial corporations 171.9 210.3 151.2 161.8 138.1 151.2 182.3 165.2 152.0
       General government 56.3 69.9 69.2 70.7 61.4 69.2 78.9 75.3 70.9
       Households 212.8 259.7 216.4 203.2 190.2 216.4 240.9 234.3 216.8
     Listed shares of the rest of the world 995.6 1,126.3 823.1 795.3 732.0 823.1 941.1 976.0 926.2
     Other equity  1 1,525.5 1,637.9 1,396.6 1,465.0 1,419.7 1,396.6 1,467.2 1,461.4 1,411.8
   Insurance technical reserves 283.1 287.4 290.9 289.2 290.0 290.9 291.8 292.7 293.6
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 83.4 137.9 73.3 142.4 169.0 73.3 44.7 39.5 15.0
   Other accounts payable 1,276.0 1,524.8 1,604.1 1,565.3 1,654.8 1,604.1 1,601.2 1,620.1 1,680.5
   Total 7,411.2 8,293.2 7,772.0 7,704.3 7,754.4 7,772.0 8,040.9 8,079.6 7,963.2
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
56•
IX. Financial accounts
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2022 2023
 Item 2020 2021 2022 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 213.31 146.18 111.83 27.31 33.06 40.72 –11.01 26.09 14.35
     Currency 61.94 60.57 44.97 11.50 13.69 6.15 2.80 3.94 1.70
     Deposits 151.36 85.61 66.86 15.81 19.37 34.57 –13.81 22.15 12.65
       Transferable deposits 165.34 90.84 47.63 23.73 20.48 4.41 –60.51 –18.16 –32.67
       Time deposits 1.29 –5.09 35.17 –4.31 6.22 33.10 50.22 43.29 44.18
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) –15.26 –0.13 –15.94 –3.61 –7.32 –2.95 –3.52 –2.99 1.14
   Debt securities –5.94 –5.89 25.03 4.85 5.36 11.96 29.74 20.45 14.76
     Short-term debt securities 0.08 0.31 2.01 0.06 0.17 1.79 7.99 6.12 3.72
     Long-term debt securities –6.02 –6.20 23.02 4.80 5.18 10.17 21.74 14.33 11.04
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors –2.55 –3.70 20.31 3.77 3.76 10.52 25.57 16.76 12.13
         Non-financial corporations –1.32 –0.83 0.50 –0.02 0.21 0.23 0.52 1.11 1.09
         Financial corporations –1.25 –2.57 17.47 3.18 2.94 9.01 21.52 12.75 9.47
         General government 0.02 –0.30 2.35 0.61 0.61 1.29 3.52 2.90 1.57
       Debt securities of the rest of the world –3.38 –2.19 4.72 1.08 1.60 1.44 4.17 3.70 2.63
   Equity and investment fund shares 90.20 136.69 78.09 22.22 9.21 15.59 12.05 10.72 8.17
     Equity 48.53 31.80 26.89 9.88 3.98 4.97 0.11 0.36 1.08
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 16.06 14.29 12.38 5.54 3.36 0.70 –0.91 0.01 –1.29
         Non-financial corporations 11.92 12.71 9.96 3.90 2.68 1.36 –2.03 0.09 –0.28
         Financial corporations 4.14 1.58 2.42 1.64 0.67 –0.66 1.12 –0.08 –1.00
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 23.29 10.83 8.55 2.35 –0.45 3.04 0.44 –0.21 1.82
       Other equity  1 9.19 6.69 5.96 1.99 1.07 1.23 0.57 0.56 0.54
     Investment fund shares 41.67 104.88 51.19 12.33 5.23 10.62 11.94 10.36 7.10
       Money market fund shares 0.09 0.19 0.82 0.28 0.12 0.44 0.43 1.47 1.58
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 41.58 104.70 50.37 12.05 5.11 10.18 11.50 8.89 5.51
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 18.34 20.31 –0.46 –1.85 –1.30 –1.81 6.45 –0.72 –0.77
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 47.71 51.63 31.70 5.62 12.12 7.39 1.45 0.79 –3.71
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 33.68 27.32 48.64 12.58 8.63 11.96 14.13 5.01 12.37
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts receivable  2 –10.46 –0.23 –1.92 0.41 0.84 –19.20 19.48 –1.61 12.67
   Total 386.85 376.00 292.90 71.14 67.92 66.60 72.28 60.74 57.84
 External financing
   Loans 83.95 98.17 83.67 27.92 25.87 9.50 2.65 5.82 6.32
     Short-term loans –5.61 0.86 2.59 1.09 0.74 0.10 0.74 –0.28 –0.49
     Long-term loans 89.55 97.31 81.08 26.83 25.14 9.40 1.91 6.10 6.81
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 85.72 99.89 79.69 26.63 23.30 10.53 2.89 6.05 6.44
       Consumer loans –4.29 –0.89 4.60 0.91 2.59 0.87 0.54 1.26 1.66
       Entrepreneurial loans 2.51 –0.83 –0.61 0.39 –0.01 –1.90 –0.78 –1.49 –1.78
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 83.17 94.32 82.56 27.94 24.46 9.45 1.80 4.69 6.41
       Loans from financial corporations other than MFIs 0.78 3.85 1.11 –0.02 1.41 0.05 0.85 1.13 –0.09
       Loans from general government and rest of the world 0.00 –0.00 –0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts payable 0.01 0.90 2.98 0.80 1.19 1.93 –0.55 –0.39 0.45
   Total 83.96 99.07 86.65 28.73 27.06 11.43 2.10 5.43 6.77
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
57•
IX. Financial accounts
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2022 2023
 Item 2020 2021 2022 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 2,860.4 3,005.6 3,119.4 3,047.4 3,084.0 3,119.4 3,107.2 3,133.4 3,149.5
     Currency 324.5 385.1 430.1 410.2 423.9 430.1 432.9 436.8 438.5
     Deposits 2,535.8 2,620.5 2,689.4 2,637.2 2,660.1 2,689.4 2,674.4 2,696.6 2,711.0
       Transferable deposits 1,674.1 1,764.4 1,811.7 1,786.7 1,807.3 1,811.7 1,756.0 1,737.7 1,705.0
       Time deposits 302.8 297.3 335.4 297.9 307.6 335.4 384.6 428.1 474.1
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) 558.9 558.8 542.3 552.6 545.3 542.3 533.8 530.8 531.9
     Debt securities 113.3 109.6 125.0 107.8 110.4 125.0 157.1 177.8 192.4
       Short-term debt securities 1.6 1.8 3.9 1.8 1.9 3.9 11.9 18.1 21.9
       Long-term debt securities 111.7 107.8 121.1 106.1 108.4 121.1 145.2 159.7 170.5
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 76.7 75.3 88.4 74.7 76.1 88.4 116.1 133.1 144.6
           Non-financial corporations 10.9 9.8 9.7 8.9 8.9 9.7 10.4 11.4 12.4
           Financial corporations 63.3 63.2 74.5 63.3 64.1 74.5 98.0 111.0 120.0
           General government 2.6 2.2 4.2 2.5 3.0 4.2 7.8 10.7 12.2
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 36.6 34.3 36.6 33.1 34.3 36.6 41.0 44.7 47.8
   Equity and investment fund shares 1,536.6 1,900.6 1,725.3 1,699.9 1,661.2 1,725.3 1,824.8 1,866.3 1,837.0
     Equity 801.9 967.8 869.3 850.5 828.2 869.3 931.7 943.4 921.7
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 243.3 296.0 255.9 236.8 223.2 255.9 282.1 277.3 262.5
         Non-financial corporations 204.0 250.4 208.7 195.7 183.3 208.7 232.3 225.9 209.5
         Financial corporations 39.2 45.6 47.2 41.1 39.9 47.2 49.9 51.4 53.0
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 180.6 249.2 209.3 214.1 210.2 209.3 227.3 239.6 235.7
       Other equity  1 378.0 422.6 404.1 399.7 394.8 404.1 422.2 426.6 423.5
     Investment fund shares 734.8 932.7 856.0 849.3 833.0 856.0 893.1 922.9 915.2
       Money market fund shares 2.3 2.5 3.3 2.8 2.9 3.3 3.7 5.2 7.0
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 732.4 930.2 852.7 846.5 830.1 852.7 889.4 917.7 908.3
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 412.2 432.5 41.3 46.8 44.0 41.3 47.6 46.7 45.8
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 1,112.1 1,162.2 1,087.1 1,152.8 1,096.9 1,087.1 1,112.5 1,119.5 1,086.6
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 956.8 986.1 1,117.7 1,114.3 1,109.9 1,117.7 1,127.9 1,130.6 1,128.6
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts receivable  2 27.9 27.5 26.5 27.8 27.5 26.5 27.0 27.7 26.9
   Total 7,019.3 7,623.9 7,242.4 7,196.8 7,133.9 7,242.4 7,404.1 7,502.1 7,466.7
 Liabilities
   Loans 1,923.8 2,024.3 2,111.8 2,074.6 2,102.7 2,111.8 2,114.5 2,120.2 2,127.1
     Short-term loans 53.2 53.0 55.5 54.8 55.8 55.5 56.6 56.4 55.9
     Long-term loans 1,870.6 1,971.3 2,056.3 2,019.8 2,047.0 2,056.3 2,057.9 2,063.8 2,071.2
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 1,447.5 1,549.3 1,632.3 1,597.8 1,621.3 1,632.3 1,636.2 1,642.1 1,649.1
       Consumer loans 226.1 224.5 228.9 225.5 228.1 228.9 229.7 230.8 232.1
       Entrepreneurial loans 250.2 250.5 250.6 251.3 253.4 250.6 248.6 247.3 245.9
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,824.6 1,920.3 2,004.0 1,968.8 1,995.3 2,004.0 2,005.8 2,010.5 2,016.9
       Loans from financial corporations other than MFIs 99.1 104.0 107.8 105.8 107.4 107.8 108.8 109.7 110.2
       Loans from general government and rest of the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts payable 19.5 20.3 23.4 20.3 21.5 23.4 22.9 22.5 22.9
   Total 1,943.3 2,044.6 2,135.2 2,094.9 2,124.2 2,135.2 2,137.4 2,142.7 2,150.0
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
58•
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
General
governmentCentral
governmentState
governmentLocal
governmentSocial
security
fundsGeneral
governmentCentral
governmentState
governmentLocal
governmentSocial
security
funds
Period € billion As a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus 1
2017 +43.7 + 7.9 +13.9 +10.7 +11.1 +1.3 +0.2 +0.4 +0.3 +0.3
2018 +65.6 +21.0 +12.0 +16.7 +16.0 +1.9 +0.6 +0.4 +0.5 +0.5
2019 +53.0 +21.5 +14.0 +8.4 +9.1 +1.5 +0.6 +0.4 +0.2 +0.3
p 2020 –147.7 –87.1 –32.6 +6.9 –34.8 –4.3 –2.6 –1.0 +0.2 –1.0
p 2021 –129.7 –144.2 +5.6 +6.2 +2.6 –3.6 –4.0 +0.2 +0.2 +0.1
p 2022 –96.9 –124.3 +14.4 +4.7 +8.3 –2.5 –3.2 +0.4 +0.1 +0.2
pe 2023 –82.7 –72.4 –6.8 –8.5 +5.0 –2.0 –1.8 –0.2 –0.2 +0.1
p 2021 H1 –75.9 –61.0 –3.0 +1.3 –13.2 –4.3 –3.5 –0.2 +0.1 –0.8
pH2 –53.8 –83.2 +8.7 +4.9 +15.8 –2.9 –4.4 +0.5 +0.3 +0.8
p 2022 H1 – 4.6 –36.2 +18.2 +5.8 +7.7 –0.2 –1.9 +1.0 +0.3 +0.4
pH2 –92.3 –88.0 –3.8 –1.1 +0.6 –4.7 –4.4 –0.2 –0.1 +0.0
pe 2023 H1 –32.9 –38.3 –0.1 –4.9 +10.4 –1.6 –1.9 –0.0 –0.2 +0.5
Debt level 2 End of year or quarter
2017 2,130.3 1,361.5 616.8 168.3 0.8 65.2 41.7 18.9 5.2 0.0
2018 2,083.7 1,334.5 603.2 162.2 0.7 61.9 39.7 17.9 4.8 0.0
2019 2,069.9 1,312.3 612.7 161.4 0.9 59.6 37.8 17.6 4.6 0.0
p 2020 2,340.8 1,526.5 664.4 163.2 7.6 68.8 44.8 19.5 4.8 0.2
p 2021 2,495.5 1,679.3 665.3 165.3 0.6 69.0 46.4 18.4 4.6 0.0
p 2022 2,561.7 1,776.0 634.2 172.2 2.8 66.1 45.8 16.4 4.4 0.1
p 2022 Q1 2,499.1 1,684.3 663.4 164.9 3.4 67.6 45.6 17.9 4.5 0.1
pQ2 2,537.4 1,723.4 660.2 166.8 3.7 67.4 45.8 17.5 4.4 0.1
pQ3 2,551.3 1,757.0 643.8 166.6 4.2 66.8 46.0 16.9 4.4 0.1
pQ4 2,561.7 1,776.0 634.2 172.2 2.8 66.1 45.8 16.4 4.4 0.1
p 2023 Q1 2,586.9 1,798.4 631.9 173.1 3.5 65.7 45.6 16.0 4.4 0.1
pQ2 2,587.3 1,806.9 624.2 172.9 2.7 64.7 45.2 15.6 4.3 0.1
pQ3 2,631.0 1,852.4 621.5 175.5 3.8 64.8 45.6 15.3 4.3 0.1
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations.  1 The deficit/surplus in
accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. In connection with
the publication of the 2023 annual figures, no revised figures were released for the firsthalf of the year. Therefore, the 2023 half-year figures are not directly compatible with
the annual figures.  2 Quarterly GDP ratios are based on the national output of the four
preceding quarters.
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts *
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Period Total TaxesSocial con-
tributions Other TotalSocial
benefitsCompen-
sation of
employeesInter-
mediate
consumptionGross
capital
formation Interest OtherDeficit/
surplusMemo item:
Total tax
burden  1
€ billion
2017 1,486.9 773.3 549.5 164.2 1,443.3 784.8 250.6 169.5 71.6 33.8 132.9 +43.7 1,329.5
2018 1,557.2 808.1 572.6 176.6 1,491.6 805.6 260.3 176.4 78.5 31.2 139.7 +65.6 1,387.7
2019 1,616.5 834.7 598.2 183.6 1,563.4 846.2 273.6 187.4 84.2 27.4 144.5 +53.0 1,440.0
p 2020 1,569.9 781.7 608.1 180.1 1,717.6 904.5 285.2 211.3 92.9 21.7 201.9 –147.7 1,396.7
p 2021 1,712.9 889.0 632.1 191.8 1,842.6 941.1 295.4 226.6 92.5 21.1 266.0 –129.7 1,528.7
p 2022 1,821.2 955.9 666.8 198.6 1,918.1 974.0 307.9 238.4 100.9 26.5 270.4 –96.9 1,633.4
pe 2023 1,904.2 966.4 709.7 228.1 1,986.9 1,021.5 326.8 255.3 109.3 36.3 237.6 –82.7 1,685.0
As a percentage of GDP
2017 45.5 23.7 16.8 5.0 44.2 24.0 7.7 5.2 2.2 1.0 4.1 +1.3 40.7
2018 46.3 24.0 17.0 5.2 44.3 23.9 7.7 5.2 2.3 0.9 4.1 +1.9 41.2
2019 46.5 24.0 17.2 5.3 45.0 24.4 7.9 5.4 2.4 0.8 4.2 +1.5 41.4
p 2020 46.1 23.0 17.9 5.3 50.5 26.6 8.4 6.2 2.7 0.6 5.9 –4.3 41.0
p 2021 47.3 24.6 17.5 5.3 50.9 26.0 8.2 6.3 2.6 0.6 7.4 –3.6 42.3
p 2022 47.0 24.7 17.2 5.1 49.5 25.1 7.9 6.1 2.6 0.7 7.0 –2.5 42.1
pe 2023 46.2 23.4 17.2 5.5 48.2 24.8 7.9 6.2 2.7 0.9 5.8 –2.0 40.9
Percentage growth rates
2017 +4.2 +4.6 +4.8 +0.5 +3.8 +4.0 +4.1 +4.3 +5.1 –9.3 +4.5 . +4.7
2018 +4.7 +4.5 +4.2 +7.6 +3.3 +2.6 +3.9 +4.1 +9.7 –7.8 +5.1 . +4.4
2019 +3.8 +3.3 +4.5 +4.0 +4.8 +5.1 +5.1 +6.2 +7.2 –12.0 +3.5 . +3.8
p 2020 –2.9 –6.3 +1.6 –1.9 +9.9 +6.9 +4.2 +12.7 +10.4 –20.8 +39.7 . –3.0
p 2021 +9.1 +13.7 +3.9 +6.5 +7.3 +4.1 +3.6 +7.2 –0.5 –3.1 +31.7 . +9.4
p 2022 +6.3 +7.5 +5.5 +3.6 +4.1 +3.5 +4.3 +5.2 +9.0 +25.8 +1.7 . +6.9
pe 2023 +4.6 +1.1 +6.4 +14.8 +3.6 +4.9 +6.1 +7.1 +8.3 +37.1 –12.1 . +3.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office.  * Figures in accordance with ESA 2010.  1 Taxes and
social contributions plus customs duties and bank levies to the Single Resolution Fund.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
59•
X. Public finances in Germany
3. General government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:  3
Period Total  4 TaxesFinan-
cial
transac-
tions  5 Total  4Person-
nel
expend-
itureCurrent
grants InterestFixed
asset
forma-
tionFinan-
cial
transac-
tions  5Deficit/
surplusRev-
enue  6Expend-
itureDeficit/
surplusRev-
enueExpend-
itureDeficit/
surplus
2017 897.6 734.5 7.7 867.8 261.5 327.2 41.9 51.7 13.8 +29.8 631.5 622.0 +9.5 1,414.9 1,375.6 +39.3
2018 949.2 776.3 6.0 904.0 272.4 337.3 39.1 55.1 16.1 +45.2 656.2 642.5 +13.6 1,488.1 1,429.3 +58.8
2019 1,007.7 799.4 11.0 973.9 285.9 348.9 33.5 62.2 16.8 +33.7 685.0 676.7 +8.3 1,571.2 1,529.2 +42.0
2020 944.3 739.9 13.7 1,109.7 299.4 422.0 25.8 68.6 59.9 –165.4 719.5 747.8 –28.3 1,516.2 1,709.9 –193.7
2021 1,105.4 833.3 25.3 1,239.9 310.7 530.8 21.0 69.3 26.1 –134.5 769.2 777.1 –7.9 1,701.6 1,844.0 –142.4
P 2022 1,145.2 895.9 32.4 1,287.0 325.7 499.6 33.5 72.5 79.3 –141.8 800.6 794.8 +5.9 1,773.0 1,908.9 –135.9
2021 Q1 240.7 185.3 4.3 300.6 75.5 130.8 7.3 11.1 14.6 –59.9 P182.4 P196.3 P–13.9 P385.2 P458.9 P–73.8
Q2 267.0 195.8 7.5 297.1 74.8 122.7 10.7 15.2 10.5 –30.2 P185.9 P197.0 P–11.1 P414.1 P455.3 P–41.2
Q3 270.9 210.7 7.4 290.2 75.8 116.3 – 0.4 16.5 10.4 –19.3 P183.4 P191.9 P–8.6 P413.5 P441.4 P–27.8
Q4 332.9 237.7 6.1 347.8 84.1 153.4 3.1 26.4 – 9.4 –14.9 P197.3 P190.4 P+6.9 P492.6 P500.6 P–8.0
2022 Q1 278.2 224.0 5.0 279.3 79.6 116.8 5.5 11.9 7.0 – 1.0 P193.8 P199.8 P–6.0 P430.3 P437.3 P–7.1
Q2 288.0 224.6 5.1 294.2 77.8 126.4 10.6 15.3 5.9 – 6.2 P199.9 P196.7 P+3.2 P444.7 P447.7 P–3.1
Q3 267.9 207.0 13.3 299.0 78.1 117.0 10.8 17.7 10.8 –31.0 P194.0 P197.6 P–3.6 P418.7 P453.3 P–34.6
Q4 319.0 244.5 9.0 414.0 89.7 139.0 6.5 27.5 55.6 –95.0 P210.5 P198.1 P+12.4 P486.2 P568.8 P–82.5
2023 Q1 281.9 215.4 9.3 331.8 81.3 131.6 20.1 13.6 17.8 –49.9 P195.4 P200.8 P–5.4 P441.7 P497.0 P–55.3
Q2 311.6 218.6 9.4 313.4 84.7 118.2 24.2 17.8 2.2 – 1.8 P199.3 P198.9 P+0.4 P476.2 P477.6 P–1.4
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data.  1 Annual fig-
ures based on the quarterly figures of the Federal Statistical Office, core budgets and
off-budget entities which are assigned to the general government sector.  2 The annual
figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all pro-
visional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are estimated.  3 The develop-
ment of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in part by statisticalchangeovers.  4 Including discrepancies in clearing transactions between central, state
and local government.  5 On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as dis-
posals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this con-
tains the acquisition of equity interests and loans granted.  6 Excluding central govern-
ment liquidity assistance to the Federal Employment Agency.
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus
2017 357.8 352.8 + 5.0 396.7 385.5 +11.3 258.5 247.7 +10.7
2018 374.4 363.5 +10.9 419.6 399.8 +19.9 270.0 260.1 + 9.8
2019 382.5 369.2 +13.3 436.3 419.3 +17.0 282.4 276.7 + 5.7
2020 341.4 472.1 –130.7 455.5 489.0 –33.6 295.2 293.2 + 2.0
2021 370.3 511.9 –141.6 509.3 508.7 + 0.5 308.0 303.4 + 4.6
2022 399.6 515.6 –116.0 534.8 522.5 +12.3 328.5 325.8 + 2.7
2021 Q1 75.0 127.5 –52.5 113.7 120.7 – 7.1 61.1 69.7 – 8.6
Q2 86.4 123.5 –37.1 122.8 122.0 + 0.8 74.6 71.7 + 2.9
Q3 93.9 114.7 –20.7 125.9 120.2 + 5.7 74.6 74.9 – 0.3
Q4 115.1 146.3 –31.2 145.6 144.5 + 1.2 97.6 87.0 +10.6
2022 Q1 94.7 114.0 –19.3 134.6 122.7 +11.9 68.4 73.8 – 5.4
Q2 99.7 123.5 –23.7 133.2 123.6 + 9.6 81.0 77.3 + 3.7
Q3 89.0 127.8 –38.7 126.1 121.4 + 4.7 81.1 80.3 + 0.8
Q4 116.1 150.4 –34.2 139.6 153.4 –13.8 98.0 94.5 + 3.5
2023 Q1 96.2 116.9 –20.7 121.0 122.3 – 1.3 73.3 81.0 – 7.7
Q2 101.8 119.8 –18.0 138.5 133.6 + 4.9 87.0 86.6 + 0.4
Q3 106.1 115.9 – 9.8 123.1 120.0 + 3.2 87.4 91.5 – 4.1
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office data and Bundesbank
calculations.  1 Any amounts of the Bundesbank's profit distribution exceeding the
reference value that were used to repay parts of the debt of central government'sspecial funds are not included here.  2 Including the local authority level of the city
states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg.  3 Data of core budgets and off-budget entities
which are assigned to the general government sector.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
60•
X. Public finances in Germany
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Period Total TotalCentral
government  1State
government  1 European Union  2Local
government  3Balance of
untransferred
tax shares  4Memo item:
Amounts deducted
in the Federal
budget  5
2017 734,540 629,458 336,730 271,046 21,682 105,158 – 76 27,368
2018 776,314 665,005 349,134 287,282 28,589 111,308 + 1 26,775
2019 799,416 684,491 355,050 298,519 30,921 114,902 + 23 25,998
2020 739,911 632,268 313,381 286,065 32,822 107,916 – 274 30,266
2021 833,337 706,978 342,988 325,768 38,222 125,000 + 1,359 29,321
2022 895,854 760,321 372,121 349,583 38,617 134,146 + 1,387 34,911
2023 ... 774,112 389,114 349,554 35,444 ... ... 33,073
2022 Q1 224,006 189,158 92,112 87,240 9,806 24,772 + 10,077 7,261
Q2 224,538 190,982 94,153 86,852 9,977 34,149 – 594 11,576
Q3 205,544 174,232 84,078 80,020 10,133 33,618 – 2,306 7,953
Q4 241,767 205,950 101,778 95,471 8,702 41,607 – 5,790 8,121
2023 Q1 220,950 186,173 93,366 83,536 9,271 26,505 + 8,271 7,665
Q2 221,225 186,597 94,492 82,961 9,144 35,152 – 525 8,959
Q3 ... 195,334 98,626 87,824 8,884 ... ... 8,678
Q4 ... 206,008 102,631 95,233 8,145 ... ... 7,770
2022 Dec. . 100,688 50,377 47,747 2,563 . . 3,374
2023 Dec. . 100,841 50,408 48,442 1,990 . . 2,590
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations.  1 Before deducting or adding supplementary central government transfers,
regionalisation funds (local public transport), compensation for the transfer of motor
vehicle tax to central government and consolidation assistance, which central govern-
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these amounts
which are deducted from tax revenue in the Federal budget.  2 Customs duties andshares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from central government
tax revenue.  3 Including local government taxes in the city states Berlin, Bremen and
Hamburg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms.  4 Difference between local
government's share in the joint taxes received by the state government cash offices in
the period in question (see Table X. 6) and the amounts passed on to local govern-
ment in the same period.  5 Volume of the positions mentioned under footnote 1.
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
€ million
Joint taxes
Income taxes  2 Value added taxes (VAT)  7
Period Total  1 TotalWage
tax 3Assessed
income
tax 4Corpora-
tion tax  5Invest-
ment
income
tax 6 TotalDomestic
VATImport
VATLocal
business
tax
trans-
fers  8Central
govern-
ment
taxes  9State
govern-
ment
taxes  9EU
customs
dutiesMemo
item:
Local
govern-
ment
share in
joint
taxes
2017 674,598 312,462 195,524 59,428 29,259 28,251 226,355 170,498 55,856 8,580 99,934 22,205 5,063 45,141
2018 713,576 332,141 208,231 60,415 33,425 30,069 234,800 175,437 59,363 9,078 108,586 23,913 5,057 48,571
2019 735,869 344,016 219,660 63,711 32,013 28,632 243,256 183,113 60,143 8,114 109,548 25,850 5,085 51,379
2020 682,376 320,798 209,286 58,982 24,268 28,261 219,484 168,700 50,784 3,954 105,632 27,775 4,734 50,107
2021 760,953 370,296 218,407 72,342 42,124 37,423 250,800 187,631 63,169 4,951 98,171 31,613 5,122 53,976
2022 814,886 390,111 227,205 77,411 46,334 39,161 284,850 198,201 86,649 6,347 96,652 30,097 6,829 54,565
2023 829,774 399,271 236,227 73,388 44,852 44,803 291,394 212,596 78,798 6,347 101,829 25,199 5,734 55,662
2022 Q1 203,130 96,245 56,206 20,915 11,178 7,946 73,584 54,234 19,350 615 22,252 8,975 1,459 13,972
Q2 204,740 101,822 60,363 17,194 11,246 13,019 67,763 46,755 21,008 1,521 24,441 7,564 1,630 13,758
Q3 185,552 82,392 43,431 17,598 10,724 10,639 71,164 49,323 21,841 1,471 21,657 7,115 1,753 11,320
Q4 221,464 109,652 67,205 21,704 13,186 7,557 72,339 47,889 24,451 2,740 28,302 6,444 1,987 15,514
2023 Q1 199,764 94,453 55,669 19,728 10,700 8,357 73,522 52,197 21,325 370 23,110 6,815 1,494 13,591
Q2 199,993 98,917 59,538 15,467 12,406 11,506 67,260 47,855 19,405 1,499 24,740 6,142 1,435 13,396
Q3 208,722 98,832 56,370 17,010 9,902 15,550 76,093 56,986 19,106 1,583 24,665 6,160 1,389 13,388
Q4 221,295 107,069 64,651 21,184 11,844 9,390 74,519 55,557 18,962 2,895 29,314 6,082 1,417 15,287
2022 Dec. 108,846 66,440 29,555 19,929 12,468 4,488 24,073 15,788 8,285 1,255 14,169 2,237 672 8,158
2023 Dec. 108,983 66,241 28,903 19,884 12,327 5,126 24,941 18,423 6,518 1,300 13,899 2,130 472 8,143
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations.  1 This total, unlike
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of untrans-
ferred tax shares.  2 Respective percentage share of central, state and local government
in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corporation tax and
non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on interest income and
capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12.  3 After deducting child benefits
and subsidies for supplementary private pension plans.  4 After deducting employeerefunds and research grants.  5 After deducting research grants.  6 Final withholding tax
on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings.  7 The allocation
of revenue to central, state and local government, which is adjusted at more regular
intervals, is regulated in Section 1 of the Revenue Adjustment Act. Respective percent-
age share of central, state and local government in revenue for 2023: 47.5:49.7:2.8.
The EU share is deducted from central government's share.  8 Respective percentage
share of central and state government for 2023: 41.4:58.6.  9 For the breakdown, see
Table X. 7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
61•
X. Public finances in Germany
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
of which:
PeriodEnergy
taxSoli-
darity
surchargeTobacco
taxInsurance
taxMotor
vehicle
taxElectri-
city taxAlcohol
tax OtherTax on
the acqui-
sition of
land and
buildingsInherit-
ance
taxBetting
and
lottery
tax Other TotalLocal
business
tax 2Real
property
taxes
2017 41,022 17,953 14,399 13,269 8,948 6,944 2,094 – 4,695 13,139 6,114 1,837 1,115 68,522 52,899 13,966
2018 40,882 18,927 14,339 13,779 9,047 6,858 2,133 2,622 14,083 6,813 1,894 1,122 71,817 55,904 14,203
2019 40,683 19,646 14,257 14,136 9,372 6,689 2,118 2,648 15,789 6,987 1,975 1,099 71,661 55,527 14,439
2020 37,635 18,676 14,651 14,553 9,526 6,561 2,238 1,792 16,055 8,600 2,044 1,076 61,489 45,471 14,676
2021 37,120 11,028 14,733 14,980 9,546 6,691 2,089 1,984 18,335 9,824 2,333 1,121 77,335 61,251 14,985
2022 33,667 11,978 14,229 15,672 9,499 6,830 2,191 2,585 17,122 9,226 2,569 1,180 87,315 70,382 15,282
2023 36,658 12,239 14,672 16,851 9,514 6,832 2,159 2,904 12,203 9,286 2,477 1,233 ... ... ...
2022 Q1 4,452 2,840 2,372 7,175 2,594 1,785 531 503 5,061 2,827 701 385 21,492 17,454 3,577
Q2 9,092 3,518 3,648 2,872 2,433 1,722 505 651 4,406 2,238 661 259 21,318 16,839 4,077
Q3 7,103 2,571 3,742 3,059 2,325 1,598 549 710 4,100 2,138 596 281 21,463 16,792 4,249
Q4 13,020 3,049 4,467 2,567 2,147 1,725 606 722 3,555 2,023 611 254 23,043 19,298 3,380
2023 Q1 4,362 2,888 2,669 7,637 2,632 1,749 530 643 3,362 2,368 666 420 21,555 17,471 3,610
Q2 8,796 3,649 3,830 3,091 2,475 1,669 517 712 2,937 2,323 615 267 22,731 18,117 4,192
Q3 9,477 2,607 3,879 3,309 2,339 1,749 532 773 2,997 2,302 577 284 ... ... ...
Q4 14,023 3,095 4,294 2,813 2,068 1,665 580 776 2,907 2,292 620 263 ... ... ...
2022 Dec. 7,542 2,151 2,018 759 638 582 255 224 1,259 682 202 93 . . .
2023 Dec. 7,627 2,153 1,676 831 616 515 238 243 952 854 227 98 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations.  1 For the sum total, see Table X. 6.  2 Including revenue from offshore wind
farms.
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets *
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  3
of which: of which:
Period TotalContri-
butions  2Payments
from
central
government TotalPension
paymentsPen-
sioners'
health
insuranceDeficit/
surplus Total Deposits  4SecuritiesEquity
interests,
mortgages
and other
loans  5Real
estateMemo
item:
Adminis-
trative
assets
2017 299,826 211,424 87,502 299,297 255,261 18,028 +529 35,366 33,740 1,335 238 53 4,032
2018 312,788 221,572 90,408 308,356 263,338 18,588 +4,432 40,345 38,314 1,713 262 56 4,008
2019 327,298 232,014 94,467 325,436 277,282 20,960 +1,861 42,963 40,531 2,074 303 56 3,974
2020 335,185 235,988 98,447 339,072 289,284 21,865 –3,887 39,880 38,196 1,286 344 55 3,901
2021 348,679 245,185 102,772 347,486 296,343 22,734 +1,192 42,014 40,320 1,241 400 52 3,807
2022 363,871 258,269 104,876 360,436 308,168 23,792 +3,435 46,087 44,181 1,399 457 51 3,746
p 2023 381,460 271,782 107,905 380,593 325,735 25,341 +867 48,825 46,660 1,637 499 29 3,697
2021 Q1 83,066 57,351 25,542 86,048 73,799 5,600 –2,982 36,888 35,326 1,166 342 54 3,887
Q2 86,386 60,666 25,545 86,486 73,905 5,679 –100 36,941 35,554 988 345 53 3,871
Q3 85,535 59,941 25,468 87,123 74,453 5,718 –1,588 36,041 34,670 973 345 53 3,840
Q4 92,818 67,211 25,415 87,385 74,556 5,730 +5,432 41,974 40,310 1,241 370 52 3,835
2022 Q1 86,684 60,599 25,937 86,841 74,568 5,734 –157 41,784 39,952 1,367 399 65 3,783
Q2 90,040 63,978 25,879 87,138 74,644 5,756 +2,903 44,425 42,441 1,513 406 65 3,761
Q3 89,284 62,891 26,218 92,606 79,400 6,127 –3,322 41,548 39,767 1,315 415 51 3,775
Q4 96,931 70,750 25,995 93,444 79,944 6,170 +3,487 46,082 44,186 1,399 446 51 3,767
2023 Q1 91,370 64,171 26,972 92,422 79,330 6,142 –1,052 45,109 43,030 1,569 460 51 3,724
Q2 94,735 67,459 26,942 92,585 79,177 6,165 +2,151 47,245 45,043 1,693 461 48 3,705
Q3 93,776 66,300 26,950 97,619 83,549 6,513 –3,843 44,354 42,208 1,632 481 34 3,703
Q4 101,578 73,852 27,041 97,967 83,678 6,520 +3,611 48,825 46,660 1,637 499 29 3,697
Sources: German pension insurance scheme and Bundesbank calculations.  * Excluding
the German pension insurance scheme for mining, railway and maritime industries. The
final annual figures generally differ from the total of the reported quarterly figures as
the latter are not revised.  1 Including financial compensation payments. Excluding in-vestment spending and proceeds.  2 Including contributions for recipients of govern-
ment cash benefits.  3 Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or
quarter.  4 Including cash.  5 Excluding loans to other social security funds.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
62•
X. Public finance in Germany
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development *
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Period Total  1Contri-
butionsInsolvency
compen-
sation levyGovernment
funds TotalUnemploy-
ment
benefit  2Short-time
working
benefits  3Job
promotion  4Insolvency
benefit
paymentAdminis-
trative
expend-
iture  5Deficit/
surplusMemo item:
Deficit-
offsetting
grant or
loan from
central
government
2017 37,819 32,501 882 – 31,867 14,055 769 7,043 687 6,444 +5,952 –
2018 39,335 34,172 622 – 33,107 13,757 761 6,951 588 8,129 +6,228 –
2019 35,285 29,851 638 – 33,154 15,009 772 7,302 842 6,252 +2,131 –
2020 33,678 28,236 630 – 61,013 20,617 22,719 7,384 1,214 6,076 –27,335 6,913
2021 35,830 29,571 1,302 – 57,570 19,460 21,003 7,475 493 6,080 –21,739 16,935
2022 37,831 31,651 1,062 – 37,530 16,588 3,865 7,125 534 6,256 + 300 423
2023 42,245 36,058 748 – 39,233 18,799 1,257 7,614 1,236 7,006 +3,012 – 423
2021 Q1 8,228 6,747 289 – 18,260 5,956 8,006 1,935 184 1,391 –10,033 –
Q2 8,830 7,301 324 – 16,720 5,029 7,495 1,912 108 1,452 –7,890 –
Q3 8,791 7,290 330 – 12,042 4,447 3,631 1,744 91 1,452 –3,251 –
Q4 9,982 8,234 359 – 10,547 4,028 1,871 1,884 110 1,785 – 565 16,935
2022 Q1 8,827 7,374 251 – 10,685 4,424 2,087 1,821 135 1,412 –1,858 –
Q2 9,327 7,857 262 – 9,457 4,091 1,215 1,794 147 1,450 – 130 –
Q3 9,278 7,740 261 – 8,401 4,056 408 1,621 107 1,506 + 877 –
Q4 10,398 8,679 289 – 8,987 4,016 156 1,889 145 1,888 +1,411 423
2023 Q1 9,836 8,442 178 – 9,942 4,727 592 1,858 376 1,550 – 106 –
Q2 10,387 8,976 186 – 9,661 4,604 380 1,902 271 1,689 + 726 –
Q3 10,361 8,804 182 – 9,351 4,712 141 1,775 284 1,691 +1,010 –
Q4 11,661 9,836 202 – 10,278 4,755 145 2,079 306 2,076 +1,382 – 423
Source: Federal Employment Agency and Bundesbank calculations.  * Including transfers
to the civil servants' pension fund.  1 Excluding central government deficit-offsetting
grant or loan.  2 Unemployment benefit in case of unemployment.  3 Including seasonal
short-time working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, re-
structuring measures and refunds of social contributions.  4 Vocational training, meas-ures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, integration, compensation top-up pay-
ments and promotion of business start-ups.  5 Including collection charges to other
social security funds, excluding administrative expenditure within the framework of the
basic allowance for job seekers.
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1
of which: of which:
Period TotalContri-
butions Central
government
funds  2 TotalHospital
treatmentPharma-
ceuticalsMedical
treatmentDental
treatment  3Remedies
and
therapeutic
appliancesSickness
benefitsAdminis-
trative
expend-
iture  4Deficit/
surplus
2017 233,814 216,227 14,500 230,773 72,303 37,389 38,792 14,070 14,776 12,281 10,912 +3,041
2018 242,360 224,912 14,500 239,706 74,506 38,327 39,968 14,490 15,965 13,090 11,564 +2,654
2019 251,295 233,125 14,500 252,440 77,551 40,635 41,541 15,010 17,656 14,402 11,136 –1,145
2020 269,158 237,588 27,940 275,268 78,531 42,906 44,131 14,967 18,133 15,956 11,864 –6,110
2021 289,270 249,734 36,977 294,602 82,748 46,199 45,058 16,335 20,163 16,612 11,727 –5,332
2022 315,248 262,367 50,223 310,594 85,061 48,354 46,379 16,737 21,259 17,947 12,418 +4,654
2021 Q1 72,970 59,338 13,303 72,660 19,631 11,175 11,564 4,069 4,564 4,287 2,967 + 310
Q2 71,964 61,819 9,965 74,492 20,287 11,275 11,536 4,219 5,085 4,120 2,850 –2,529
Q3 70,592 61,899 7,942 73,569 20,748 11,756 10,730 4,060 5,085 4,004 2,849 –2,977
Q4 74,020 66,678 5,767 73,209 21,340 12,043 11,252 4,062 5,290 4,200 3,109 + 810
2022 Q1 79,253 62,142 17,049 81,493 20,550 11,891 11,847 4,286 5,216 4,574 3,510 –2,240
Q2 79,112 64,611 14,280 79,269 21,080 12,053 11,753 4,249 5,335 4,457 2,958 – 158
Q3 75,516 65,242 9,804 75,011 21,164 12,221 11,384 3,956 5,352 4,441 2,996 + 505
Q4 81,512 70,384 9,091 74,894 21,659 12,242 11,566 4,310 5,442 4,486 3,148 +6,617
2023 Q1 73,718 66,513 6,759 77,593 22,196 12,209 12,012 4,370 5,621 4,927 3,169 –3,875
Q2 73,722 68,792 4,495 76,031 22,421 12,284 11,762 4,476 5,762 4,682 3,166 –2,309
Q3 75,330 69,236 5,244 76,967 22,632 12,540 11,502 4,371 5,958 4,695 3,030 –1,637
Source: Federal Ministry of Health and Bundesbank calculations.  1 The final annual fig-
ures generally differ from the total of the reported quarterly figures as the latter are not
revised. Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compensationscheme.  2 Federal grant and liquidity assistance.  3 Including dentures.  4 Net, i.e. after
deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying contributions incurred by other
social security funds.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
63•
X. Public finances in Germany
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development *
€ million
Revenue Expenditure  1
of which: of which:
Period Total Contributions TotalNon-cash
care benefitsInpatient
care total  2Nursing
benefitContributions to
pension insur-
ance scheme  3Administrative
expenditureDeficit/
surplus
2017 36,305 36,248 38,862 6,923 16,034 10,010 1,611 1,606 – 2,557
2018 37,949 37,886 41,265 7,703 16,216 10,809 2,093 1,586 – 3,315
2019 47,228 46,508 44,008 8,257 16,717 11,689 2,392 1,781 + 3,220
2020 50,622 48,003 49,284 8,794 16,459 12,786 2,714 1,946 + 1,338
2021 52,573 49,764 53,903 9,573 16,511 13,865 3,070 2,024 – 1,330
2022 57,944 52,604 60,100 10,405 20,542 14,872 3,223 2,166 – 2,156
2021 Q1 12,093 11,831 13,344 2,355 3,971 3,387 725 512 – 1,251
Q2 12,933 12,329 13,521 2,287 4,030 3,421 745 510 – 587
Q3 12,624 12,294 13,390 2,393 4,182 3,466 783 509 – 767
Q4 14,853 13,242 13,595 2,475 4,270 3,646 788 503 + 1,258
2022 Q1 12,912 12,412 14,739 2,564 4,974 3,572 775 529 – 1,827
Q2 15,350 12,951 14,827 2,464 5,026 3,698 795 548 + 523
Q3 13,708 13,021 15,387 2,638 5,197 3,755 802 542 – 1,679
Q4 15,813 14,067 15,078 2,581 5,281 3,892 837 528 + 735
2023 Q1 14,283 13,169 14,698 2,876 5,377 3,846 843 570 – 415
Q2 14,227 13,668 14,392 2,745 5,539 3,940 869 561 – 165
Q3 15,585 15,228 14,823 2,867 5,776 4,074 891 571 + 762
Source: Federal Ministry of Health and Bundesbank calculations.  * The final annual fig-
ures generally differ from the total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the
latter are not revised.  1 Including transfers to the long-term care provident fund.  2 In-cluding benefits for short-term care and daytime/night-time nursing care, inter alia.
3 For non-professional carers.
12. Maastricht debt by creditor
€ million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Bundesbank Domestic MFIsOther domestic
financial corporations Other domestic creditors Foreign creditors
of which: of which: of which: of which: of which: Period
(end of year
or quarter) Total Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities
2017 2,130,325 319,159 305,301 546,063 194,619 180,104 81,125 56,798 10,456 1,028,201 941,750
2018 2,083,675 364,731 350,487 504,476 167,506 186,346 89,794 56,071 8,725 972,052 892,222
2019 2,069,889 366,562 352,025 468,957 158,119 183,714 88,771 61,050 7,225 989,606 908,749
2020 2,340,849 522,392 507,534 505,373 157,828 191,231 99,840 54,238 8,373 1,067,615 996,417
2021 2,495,538 716,004 700,921 497,968 144,646 191,580 103,049 51,633 7,435 1,038,353 969,245
2022 2,561,675 742,514 727,298 509,106 128,892 210,888 126,042 58,444 10,782 1,040,723 975,545
2021 Q1 2,369,872 561,444 546,540 480,026 162,961 190,136 99,333 63,796 8,060 1,074,470 1,010,641
Q2 2,419,762 620,473 605,430 482,767 151,182 189,993 99,735 52,647 7,699 1,073,882 1,008,532
Q3 2,453,545 669,659 654,600 484,986 152,068 191,571 101,742 54,275 8,070 1,053,054 987,736
Q4 2,495,538 716,004 700,921 497,968 144,646 191,580 103,049 51,633 7,435 1,038,353 969,245
2022 Q1 2,499,123 737,978 722,843 481,772 143,411 194,096 106,165 50,834 6,959 1,034,442 967,915
Q2 2,537,417 759,385 744,213 485,392 133,999 202,680 115,576 53,648 8,086 1,036,311 970,548
Q3 2,551,283 741,360 726,147 515,161 126,865 202,278 116,268 53,765 8,987 1,038,718 968,178
Q4 2,561,675 742,514 727,298 509,106 128,892 210,888 126,042 58,444 10,782 1,040,723 975,545
p 2023 Q1 2,586,899 741,587 726,326 480,919 129,372 208,933 124,776 63,130 16,123 1,092,330 1,029,400
pQ2 2,587,307 719,981 704,639 462,003 126,047 209,149 124,765 63,798 20,887 1,132,377 1,069,277
pQ3 2,630,995 706,113 690,704 454,964 126,674 208,330 124,371 72,626 23,316 1,188,961 1,123,791
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
64•
X. Public finances in Germany
13. Maastricht debt by instrument
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:  2
Period
(end of year
or quarter) TotalCurrency
and deposits  1Short-term
debt securities
(up to one year)Long-term
debt securities
(more than one year)Short-term loans
(up to one year)Long-term loans
(more than one year)Debt vis-à-vis
other government
subsectorsClaims vis-à-vis
other government
subsectors
General government
2017 2,130,325 14,298 48,789 1,484,462 88,841 493,935 . .
2018 2,083,675 14,680 52,572 1,456,160 79,171 481,091 . .
2019 2,069,889 14,449 56,350 1,458,540 64,464 476,086 . .
2020 2,340,849 14,486 173,851 1,596,141 85,384 470,987 . .
2021 Q1 2,369,872 12,283 190,039 1,637,496 62,705 467,348 . .
Q2 2,419,762 13,065 182,676 1,689,902 69,170 464,949 . .
Q3 2,453,545 13,565 192,489 1,711,727 70,496 465,268 . .
Q4 2,495,538 17,743 195,421 1,729,876 88,481 464,017 . .
2022 Q1 2,499,123 15,676 172,809 1,774,484 70,930 465,223 . .
Q2 2,537,417 17,793 161,844 1,810,578 76,484 470,718 . .
Q3 2,551,283 22,631 149,825 1,796,620 82,049 500,158 . .
Q4 2,561,675 16,985 150,371 1,818,189 112,199 463,933 . .
p 2023 Q1 2,586,899 14,913 145,595 1,880,403 83,437 462,551 . .
pQ2 2,587,307 14,829 154,379 1,891,236 67,865 458,998 . .
pQ3 2,630,995 17,519 166,076 1,922,780 64,054 460,566 . .
Central government
2017 1,361,492 14,298 36,297 1,131,896 48,305 130,696 1,131 10,618
2018 1,334,500 14,680 42,246 1,107,140 43,067 127,367 933 9,975
2019 1,312,338 14,449 38,480 1,101,866 29,956 127,587 605 10,301
2020 1,526,491 14,486 154,498 1,180,683 48,414 128,410 609 14,521
2021 Q1 1,552,060 12,283 167,485 1,212,495 31,284 128,513 604 22,929
Q2 1,602,137 13,065 165,374 1,259,206 36,297 128,195 647 29,448
Q3 1,630,056 13,565 170,962 1,280,586 37,116 127,826 693 31,382
Q4 1,679,310 17,743 176,428 1,300,416 57,779 126,943 618 8,078
2022 Q1 1,684,290 15,676 155,123 1,340,340 41,680 131,472 576 10,430
Q2 1,723,415 17,793 147,681 1,373,616 47,196 137,129 623 10,491
Q3 1,757,005 22,631 144,999 1,369,628 55,559 164,188 828 13,101
Q4 1,775,982 16,985 146,989 1,391,638 93,352 127,017 8,815 9,011
p 2023 Q1 1,798,377 14,913 140,499 1,456,147 59,981 126,837 3,664 10,500
pQ2 1,806,904 14,829 150,168 1,471,888 42,803 127,216 2,889 11,235
pQ3 1,852,416 17,519 160,824 1,503,891 43,413 126,770 6,373 9,852
State government
2017 616,785 – 12,543 354,688 19,790 229,764 14,038 2,046
2018 603,166 – 10,332 351,994 19,250 221,590 14,035 1,891
2019 612,698 – 17,873 360,495 19,076 215,254 14,934 1,826
2020 664,421 – 19,354 419,862 19,481 205,724 11,924 1,410
2021 Q1 667,651 – 22,556 429,623 14,375 201,097 10,942 1,995
Q2 667,940 – 17,304 435,709 16,178 198,750 12,454 2,041
Q3 673,373 – 21,528 436,499 16,334 199,012 11,414 2,110
Q4 665,250 – 18,994 434,930 14,074 197,252 12,441 1,772
2022 Q1 663,427 – 17,688 439,767 12,533 193,438 11,634 1,915
Q2 660,169 – 14,166 442,621 12,404 190,979 11,393 1,742
Q3 643,827 – 4,828 432,653 14,873 191,472 14,067 2,147
Q4 634,152 – 3,384 432,186 9,881 188,702 11,585 1,719
p 2023 Q1 631,946 – 5,099 429,985 10,976 185,886 11,918 2,360
pQ2 624,216 – 4,215 424,818 11,908 183,276 13,336 2,041
pQ3 621,544 – 5,256 424,545 8,681 183,062 11,049 2,629
Local government
2017 168,305 – – 3,082 24,909 140,314 1,881 466
2018 162,175 – 1 3,046 20,903 138,225 1,884 497
2019 161,367 – – 2,996 19,607 138,763 1,856 532
2020 163,163 – – 3,366 18,520 141,276 1,402 330
2021 Q1 163,189 – – 3,121 17,998 142,070 2,009 325
Q2 164,321 – – 3,121 18,969 142,231 2,070 323
Q3 163,772 – – 3,000 18,156 142,616 2,127 321
Q4 165,316 – – 3,241 18,011 144,064 1,813 313
2022 Q1 164,860 – – 3,052 17,532 144,276 1,884 349
Q2 166,840 – – 2,902 17,566 146,373 1,724 370
Q3 166,624 – – 2,856 15,623 148,145 2,098 392
Q4 172,244 – – 2,896 17,917 151,431 1,614 399
p 2023 Q1 173,058 – – 2,883 17,102 153,073 2,163 422
pQ2 172,863 – – 2,988 17,678 152,197 1,746 748
pQ3 175,474 – – 2,825 18,291 154,358 2,329 796
For footnotes see end of table.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
65•
X. Public finances in Germany
13. Maastricht debt by instrument (cont´d)
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:   2
Period
(end of year
or quarter) TotalCurrency
and deposits  1Short-term
debt securities
(up to one year)Long-term
debt securities
(more than one year)Short-term loans
(up to one year)Long-term loans
(more than one year)Debt vis-à-vis
other government
subsectorsClaims vis-à-vis
other government
subsectors
Social security funds
2017 807 – – – 262 545 15 3,934
2018 704 – – – 388 316 16 4,506
2019 899 – – – 375 524 16 4,753
2020 7,641 – – – 7,128 513 6,931 4,606
2021 Q1 16,381 – – – 15,985 395 15,853 4,160
Q2 21,395 – – – 20,995 400 20,860 4,220
Q3 24,449 – – – 24,053 395 23,872 4,292
Q4 553 – – – 131 422 19 4,729
2022 Q1 3,378 – – – 2,883 496 2,739 4,140
Q2 3,690 – – – 3,098 592 2,958 4,095
Q3 4,151 – – – 3,459 692 3,330 4,683
Q4 2,755 – – – 608 2,147 1,442 12,328
p 2023 Q1 3,527 – – – 1,411 2,116 2,263 6,728
pQ2 2,737 – – – 595 2,142 1,442 5,389
pQ3 3,755 – – – 1,600 2,156 2,442 8,917
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office and
the Federal Republic of Germany - Finance Agency.  1 Particularly liabilities resulting
from coins in circulation.  2 Besides direct loan relationships, claims and debt vis-à-visother government subsectors also comprise securities holdings purchased on the
market. No entry for general government as debt and claims are consolidated between
different government subsectors.
14. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category
€ million
Currency and deposits  2Debt securities
of which:  3 of which:  3
Period
(end of year
or quarter) Total  1 Total  1Federal
day bond Total  1Conventional
Federal
bonds
(Bunds)Conventional
Federal
notes
(Bobls)Conventional
Federal
Treasury
notes
(Schätze)  4Treasury
discount
paper
(Bubills)  5Federal
savings
notesGreen
Federal
securitiesInflation-
linked
Federal
securities  6Capital
indexation
of inflation-
linked
securities Loans  1
2007 987,909 6,675 . 917,584 564,137 173,949 102,083 37,385 10,287 . 13,464 506 63,650
2008 1,019,905 12,466 3,174 928,754 571,913 164,514 105,684 40,795 9,649 . 19,540 1,336 78,685
2009 1,086,173 9,981 2,495 1,013,072 577,798 166,471 113,637 104,409 9,471 . 24,730 1,369 63,121
2010 1,337,160 10,890 1,975 1,084,019 602,624 185,586 126,220 85,867 8,704 . 35,906 2,396 242,251
2011 1,346,869 10,429 2,154 1,121,331 615,200 199,284 130,648 58,297 8,208 . 44,241 3,961 215,109
2012 1,390,377 9,742 1,725 1,177,168 631,425 217,586 117,719 56,222 6,818 . 52,119 5,374 203,467
2013 1,392,735 10,582 1,397 1,192,025 643,200 234,759 110,029 50,004 4,488 . 51,718 4,730 190,127
2014 1,398,472 12,146 1,187 1,206,203 653,823 244,633 103,445 27,951 2,375 . 63,245 5,368 180,123
2015 1,371,933 13,949 1,070 1,188,463 663,296 232,387 96,389 18,536 1,305 . 74,495 5,607 169,521
2016 1,365,579 15,491 1,010 1,179,062 670,245 221,551 95,727 23,609 737 . 66,464 3,602 171,026
2017 1,361,492 14,298 966 1,168,193 693,687 203,899 91,013 10,037 289 . 72,855 4,720 179,001
2018 1,334,500 14,680 921 1,149,386 710,513 182,847 86,009 12,949 48 . 64,647 5,139 170,435
2019 1,312,338 14,449 –1,140,346 719,747 174,719 89,230 13,487 . . 69,805 6,021 157,543
2020 1,526,491 14,486 .1,335,181 801,910 179,560 98,543 113,141 . 9,876 58,279 3,692 176,824
2021 1,679,310 17,743 .1,476,844 892,464 190,839 103,936 153,978 . 21,627 65,390 6,722 184,722
2022 1,775,982 16,985 .1,538,628 947,349 198,084 113,141 137,990 . 36,411 72,357 15,844 220,369
2021 Q1 1,552,060 12,283 .1,379,980 814,864 189,935 103,910 134,800 . 11,026 60,687 3,857 159,797
Q2 1,602,137 13,065 .1,424,579 861,455 184,413 104,997 139,451 . 16,526 62,569 5,056 164,492
Q3 1,630,056 13,565 .1,451,549 869,195 198,692 105,398 146,533 . 19,824 63,851 5,456 164,942
Q4 1,679,310 17,743 .1,476,844 892,464 190,839 103,936 153,978 . 21,627 65,390 6,722 184,722
2022 Q1 1,684,290 15,676 .1,495,463 911,280 204,534 108,702 140,427 . 23,961 67,776 7,809 173,152
Q2 1,723,415 17,793 .1,521,297 937,949 198,472 111,343 138,495 . 29,425 70,217 11,209 184,325
Q3 1,757,005 22,631 .1,514,627 918,838 208,509 111,675 137,740 . 35,527 71,498 12,879 219,747
Q4 1,775,982 16,985 .1,538,628 947,349 198,084 113,141 137,990 . 36,411 72,357 15,844 220,369
p 2023 Q1 1,798,377 14,913 .1,596,646 987,363 213,514 120,904 127,143 . 39,459 73,591 15,497 186,818
pQ2 1,806,904 14,829 .1,622,056 1,007,004 211,742 124,160 139,012 . 50,243 59,227 13,604 170,019
pQ3 1,852,416 17,519 .1,664,715 1,021,675 226,340 125,255 148,407 . 52,763 59,923 13,863 170,183
Sources: Federal Republic of Germany - Finance Agency, Federal Statistical Office, and
Bundesbank calculations.  1 Comprises all of central government, i.e. all off-budget en-
tities in addition to the core budget, including the government-owned bad bank FMS
Wertmanagement and liabilities attributed to central government from an economic
perspective under the European System of Accounts (ESA) 2010.  2 Particularly liabilitiesresulting from coins in circulation.  3 Issuances by the Federal Republic of Germany. Ex-
cluding issuers' holdings of own securities but including those held by other govern-
ment entities.  4 Including medium-term notes issued by the Treuhand agency (expired
in 2011).  5 Including Federal Treasury financing papers (expired in 2014).  6 Excluding
inflation-induced indexation of capital.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
66•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
2022 2023
2021 2022 2023 2021 2022 2023 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
Item Index 2015=100 Annual percentage change
At constant prices, chained
 I. Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 108.2 107.6 105.5 7.4 –0.5 –2.0 0.7 –0.9 0.3 –2.1 0.3 –2.0 –3.8
Construction 97.4 94.1 94.3 –5.3 –3.3 0.2 4.3 –3.7 –4.9 –7.0 –1.6 –1.0 1.2
Wholesale/retail trade, transport and
storage, hotel and restaurant services 102.8 106.3 105.2 1.2 3.3 –1.0 8.3 5.1 1.6 –0.9 0.6 –1.2 –0.4
Information and communication 130.1 136.5 140.1 7.8 5.0 2.6 5.1 4.1 6.8 3.8 2.6 3.0 2.1
Financial and insurance activities 100.8 105.0 104.6 6.8 4.2 –0.4 4.6 3.0 2.9 6.3 2.2 –0.7 –1.2
Real estate activities 102.6 103.5 104.5 1.4 0.8 1.0 1.6 1.2 0.8 –0.3 0.8 0.4 1.0
Business services  1 109.7 112.5 112.9 4.6 2.6 0.3 6.7 1.5 1.0 1.0 –0.2 0.4 0.3
Public services, education and health 106.8 109.6 110.7 1.2 2.7 1.0 2.6 2.4 2.5 3.1 2.7 0.7 –0.5
Other services 90.3 95.7 97.4 0.2 6.0 1.8 8.8 7.5 2.4 5.7 1.7 0.9 1.1
Gross value added 106.1 107.9 107.8 3.3 1.7 –0.1 3.7 1.7 1.3 0.3 0.8 –0.3 –0.7
Gross domestic product  2 106.3 108.2 107.9 3.2 1.8 –0.3 4.3 1.6 1.2 0.2 0.2 –0.4 –0.8
 II. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 102.4 106.4 105.5 1.5 3.9 –0.8 8.4 6.0 1.8 0.2 –0.2 –0.8 –2.0
Government consumption 117.5 119.3 117.3 3.1 1.6 –1.7 4.5 1.6 0.1 0.1 –2.4 –3.2 –1.6
Machinery and equipment 103.4 107.5 110.7 2.8 4.0 3.0 0.9 0.7 9.5 4.9 7.2 4.6 1.1
Premises 110.0 108.0 105.8 –2.6 –1.8 –2.1 3.2 –3.6 –1.6 –4.8 –3.3 –1.8 –1.0
Other investment  4 116.7 115.8 115.1 2.1 –0.7 –0.6 –1.6 –1.3 –1.3 1.0 –0.8 –0.8 –0.6
Changes in inventories  5,6 . . . 0.9 0.7 0.0 –0.4 0.2 1.7 1.3 0.3 0.7 –0.3
Domestic demand 108.4 111.8 110.8 2.5 3.2 –0.9 5.3 3.2 3.1 1.2 –0.3 –0.4 –1.7
Net exports  6 . . . 0.9 –1.2 0.6 –0.7 –1.5 –1.8 –0.9 0.3 0.0 0.9
     Exports 111.8 115.5 113.5 9.7 3.3 –1.8 4.6 3.7 5.3 –0.2 1.1 –2.0 –3.8
     Imports 118.0 125.9 122.0 8.9 6.6 –3.0 7.1 7.8 10.3 1.8 0.5 –2.2 –5.7
Gross domestic product  2 106.3 108.2 107.9 3.2 1.8 –0.3 4.3 1.6 1.2 0.2 0.2 –0.4 –0.8
At current prices (€ billion)
 III. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 1,785.5 1,979.3 2,088.0 4.5 10.9 5.5 13.4 12.8 9.3 8.5 8.0 6.0 3.8
Government consumption 796.8 850.9 886.5 6.3 6.8 4.2 9.3 6.5 5.7 5.8 2.0 3.9 4.7
Machinery and equipment 227.5 253.4 275.9 4.8 11.4 8.9 6.4 7.6 18.1 13.1 15.2 11.3 6.6
Premises 406.5 463.5 491.0 5.7 14.0 5.9 18.8 14.8 13.3 9.9 10.8 5.9 4.6
Other investment  4 136.5 139.3 141.9 3.8 2.1 1.9 2.3 2.0 1.9 2.2 1.6 1.9 2.1
Changes in inventories  5 69.4 114.1 64.1 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 3,422.2 3,800.5 3,947.5 6.7 11.1 3.9 12.9 12.2 11.3 8.1 5.7 4.3 1.9
Net exports 195.3 76.3 173.7 . . . . . . . . . .
     Exports 1,710.3 1,974.2 1,950.1 15.6 15.4 –1.2 16.6 17.8 19.0 9.1 5.9 –1.4 –5.9
     Imports 1,515.0 1,897.9 1,776.4 18.2 25.3 –6.4 26.8 29.6 33.3 13.4 3.6 –5.7 –13.7
Gross domestic product  2 3,617.5 3,876.8 4,121.2 6.3 7.2 6.3 9.1 7.7 5.8 6.2 6.7 6.3 6.0
 IV. Prices (2015=100)
Private consumption 108.8 116.1 123.5 3.0 6.7 6.3 4.6 6.4 7.4 8.3 8.2 6.9 5.9
Gross domestic product 112.5 118.4 126.2 3.0 5.3 6.6 4.6 6.0 4.5 6.0 6.5 6.7 6.9
Terms of trade 99.8 95.0 99.0 –2.9 –4.9 4.2 –5.9 –5.5 –6.5 –1.9 1.6 4.3 6.8
 V. Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,918.3 2,023.6 2,158.5 3.5 5.5 6.7 6.8 5.5 4.3 5.4 6.7 7.1 6.9
Entrepreneurial and property income 851.0 867.4 923.7 19.5 1.9 6.5 4.6 –0.5 3.8 –0.6 9.7 7.4 4.2
National income 2,769.3 2,890.9 3,082.2 7.9 4.4 6.6 6.1 3.7 4.2 3.7 7.6 7.2 6.1
Memo item: Gross national income 3,756.8 4,027.6 4,288.9 7.3 7.2 6.5 9.6 7.6 5.8 6.0 6.5 6.6 6.4
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2023. Initial annual
results for 2023: figures computed in January 2024.  1 Professional, scientific, technical,
administration and support service activities.  2 Gross value added plus taxes on prod-
ucts (netted with subsidies on products).  3 Including non-profit institutions servinghouseholds.  4 Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft ware and entertain-
ment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets.  5 Including net increase in valu-
ables.  6 Contribution of growth to GDP .

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
67•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
2. Output in the production sector *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Production
sector,
totalConstruc-
tion Energy Total Inter-
mediate
goods 
Capital
goods 
Durable
goodsNon-
durable
goodsManu-
facture of
basic metals
and
fabricated
metal
productsManu-
facture of
computers,
electronic
and optical
products
and electrical
equipmentMacinery
and
equipmentMotor
vehicels,
trailers
and semi-
trailers
2015 = 100
% of total  1   100      14.04      6.37      79.60      29.44      36.96 2.28      10.92      10.27      9.95      12.73      14.14
Period
2020 95.0 116.1 84.4 92.2 94.9 88.2 97.6 97.2 90.6 98.5 89.5 75.9
2021 98.4 114.3 87.0 96.5 102.6 90.5 103.6 99.1 98.9 108.7 95.9 73.9
2022 97.9 112.5 85.5 96.3 99.5 92.3 105.4 99.6 96.5 114.0 96.7 76.7
x 2023 96.4 111.6 72.7 95.6 94.4 96.4 99.8 95.1 93.3 115.4 95.9 85.5
2022 Q4 100.2 119.9 84.3 98.0 93.2 100.3 107.0 101.4 93.0 116.9 105.7 83.0
2023 Q1 95.9 96.7 85.1 96.7 98.0 95.8 104.7 95.0 95.8 117.6 92.9 90.4
Q2 97.3 114.8 66.2 96.7 96.4 97.3 99.2 95.0 96.1 115.9 95.9 88.6
Q3 95.6 116.8 61.8 94.6 94.6 93.9 98.5 95.9 93.2 117.0 95.4 78.9
x Q4 96.6 118.0 77.7 94.3 88.6 98.8 97.1 94.4 88.4 111.0 99.4 84.3
2022 Dec. 93.3 113.8 86.9 90.2 78.6 98.0 95.8 93.9 78.2 108.0 112.3 70.0
2023 Jan. 88.0 80.1 89.2 89.3 93.7 84.7 94.2 92.0 90.3 108.4 83.2 78.3
Feb. 95.1 97.0 82.2 95.8 96.6 96.1 103.2 91.4 94.1 115.9 91.8 93.9
Mar. 104.7 113.0 83.9 105.0 103.6 106.5 116.6 101.5 102.9 128.6 103.7 99.1
Apr. 96.4 113.4 73.1 95.2 96.1 94.6 101.4 93.8 96.0 113.5 92.3 86.9
May 96.5 114.7 64.2 95.8 95.8 96.8 95.9 92.8 95.4 114.2 93.8 90.3
June 99.0 116.4 61.2 99.0 97.2 100.6 100.2 98.4 96.8 120.1 101.6 88.5
2 July 97.3 122.0 64.0 95.6 96.3 94.4 98.9 97.2 94.5 116.0 95.7 79.5
2 Aug. 89.8 109.9 60.9 88.6 91.7 84.4 91.1 93.9 89.1 113.6 86.2 67.4
Sep. 99.7 118.4 60.5 99.5 95.9 102.8 105.4 96.7 95.9 121.4 104.2 89.7
x Oct. 98.1 118.8 71.9 96.5 95.8 96.3 102.9 98.0 95.1 116.3 92.6 86.6
x Nov. 101.2 120.7 78.1 99.6 94.9 103.5 102.2 98.3 94.9 115.5 100.2 93.8
x,p Dec. 90.5 114.4 83.0 86.9 75.0 96.5 86.1 87.0 75.1 101.3 105.3 72.4
Annual percentage change
2020 – 7.7 + 3.0 – 6.6 – 9.8 – 6.8 –14.0 – 8.1 – 3.8 –11.9 – 7.5 –13.4 –20.0
2021 + 3.6 – 1.6 + 3.1 + 4.7 + 8.1 + 2.6 + 6.1 + 2.0 + 9.2 +10.4 + 7.2 – 2.6
2022 – 0.5 – 1.6 – 1.7 – 0.2 – 3.0 + 2.0 + 1.7 + 0.5 – 2.4 + 4.9 + 0.8 + 3.8
x 2023 – 1.5 – 0.8 –15.0 – 0.7 – 5.1 + 4.4 – 5.3 – 4.5 – 3.3 + 1.2 – 0.8 +11.5
2022 Q4 – 1.2 – 4.0 – 9.8 + 0.1 – 5.7 + 5.5 – 1.7 – 1.3 – 3.1 + 6.7 + 3.4 +11.8
2023 Q1 + 0.1 – 2.1 –10.8 + 1.3 – 5.0 + 9.5 + 0.9 – 4.8 – 3.1 + 7.0 + 2.6 +23.2
Q2 – 0.2 – 0.1 –20.0 + 1.1 – 5.3 + 8.6 – 6.0 – 2.3 – 2.1 + 4.2 + 1.9 +18.0
Q3 – 2.4 + 0.2 –22.4 – 1.7 – 5.2 + 2.5 – 6.6 – 4.1 – 2.9 – 0.7 – 1.1 + 4.8
x Q4 – 3.6 – 1.6 – 7.8 – 3.8 – 5.0 – 1.5 – 9.3 – 6.8 – 5.0 – 5.0 – 6.0 + 1.5
2022 Dec. – 3.2 – 7.9 – 8.7 – 1.6 –10.3 + 4.5 – 3.0 – 0.3 – 5.7 + 2.8 + 3.6 + 6.9
2023 Jan. – 1.7 – 2.1 – 9.8 – 1.0 – 6.0 + 4.8 – 1.4 – 3.2 – 4.2 + 5.6 + 2.5 +11.7
Feb. + 0.4 + 0.2 –13.2 + 1.5 – 4.5 + 9.0 – 1.3 – 4.0 – 3.6 + 7.2 + 2.8 +18.9
Mar. + 1.4 – 3.9 – 9.5 + 3.2 – 4.5 +14.0 + 5.0 – 7.1 – 1.7 + 8.2 + 2.5 +39.4
Apr. + 0.8 + 1.1 –18.1 + 2.1 – 5.1 +10.6 – 3.8 – 1.3 – 1.4 + 5.5 + 3.7 +22.2
May + 0.1 + 0.6 –20.7 + 1.4 – 5.4 +10.4 – 8.6 – 4.0 – 2.2 + 3.4 + 2.3 +22.4
June – 1.6 – 1.9 –21.3 – 0.2 – 5.4 + 5.1 – 5.6 – 1.5 – 2.6 + 3.8 ± 0.0 +10.3
2 July – 1.8 + 0.8 –22.1 – 1.0 – 5.8 + 3.2 – 2.5 – 0.2 – 3.1 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 4.7
2 Aug. – 1.9 – 0.5 –22.0 – 0.7 – 3.5 + 3.3 – 7.2 – 2.9 – 1.0 + 1.4 – 3.6 +12.0
Sep. – 3.6 + 0.3 –23.1 – 3.2 – 6.2 + 1.2 – 9.6 – 8.7 – 4.4 – 3.7 – 0.4 + 0.1
x Oct. – 3.4 – 2.5 –11.0 – 3.2 – 4.6 – 0.4 – 7.7 – 6.9 – 5.6 – 1.9 – 5.9 + 3.5
x Nov. – 4.3 – 2.7 – 8.2 – 4.4 – 5.7 – 2.5 –10.0 – 6.3 – 5.2 – 7.0 – 5.7 – 1.7
x,p Dec. – 3.0 + 0.5 – 4.5 – 3.7 – 4.6 – 1.5 –10.1 – 7.3 – 4.0 – 6.2 – 6.2 + 3.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * For explanatory notes, see
Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tabels III.1.a to III.1.c  o Using
JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Share of gross value added at factor cost of the production
sector in the base year 2015.  2 Influenced by a change in holiday dates.  x Provisional;estimated and adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office to the results of the
Quarterly Production Survey and the Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction
industry, respectively.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
68•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
3. Orders received by industry *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Period 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change
Total
2020 97.2 – 7.3 97.9 – 5.4 95.6 – 9.3 105.7 – 1.2 124.4 + 0.9 99.6 – 2.1
2021 119.3 +22.7 124.6 +27.3 116.3 +21.7 117.4 +11.1 146.5 +17.8 107.9 + 8.3
2022 126.2 + 5.8 138.4 +11.1 118.3 + 1.7 129.0 + 9.9 164.8 +12.5 117.2 + 8.6
p 2023 122.0 – 3.3 125.3 – 9.5 119.8 + 1.3 123.4 – 4.3 146.7 –11.0 115.8 – 1.2
2022 Dec. 121.3 – 1.9 127.6 + 6.2 118.6 – 6.5 112.0 – 2.1 139.7 – 6.2 102.9 – 0.2
2023 Jan. 125.8 – 5.3 139.2 – 3.5 118.1 – 6.9 122.2 – 3.4 135.6 –11.9 117.8 + 0.3
Feb. 128.9 + 0.1 133.7 – 2.1 126.3 + 1.9 125.8 – 2.4 154.0 + 0.1 116.6 – 3.4
Mar. 130.2 – 6.3 138.7 – 9.4 124.8 – 3.4 132.5 – 8.9 168.5 –13.0 120.6 – 6.9
Apr. 115.9 – 6.1 128.6 –10.0 107.6 – 1.9 118.6 –13.0 156.4 –17.1 106.1 –10.9
May 121.4 – 2.0 124.5 –10.8 120.1 + 5.5 117.1 – 8.2 133.2 –25.5 111.8 + 1.2
June 136.6 + 5.6 128.4 – 9.8 142.7 +18.5 128.6 – 5.4 153.1 – 9.0 120.6 – 3.8
July 116.3 – 8.9 120.0 –16.4 113.1 – 4.9 123.6 + 2.4 128.6 –14.3 122.1 +10.0
Aug. 107.4 – 6.2 112.0 –12.8 102.1 – 2.7 127.4 + 4.3 151.2 – 6.1 119.6 + 9.3
Sep. 119.4 – 3.5 120.6 – 8.6 118.6 + 1.3 119.6 –11.0 143.9 –13.5 111.7 – 9.8
Oct. 116.6 – 7.1 122.0 – 9.5 112.1 – 6.0 125.1 – 3.0 145.3 –16.3 118.5 + 3.8
Nov. 119.0 – 4.3 120.6 –10.9 116.7 – 0.3 128.5 – 0.7 163.8 + 9.5 116.9 – 4.8
p Dec. 126.3 + 4.1 114.9 –10.0 135.2 +14.0 112.0 ± 0.0 126.9 – 9.2 107.1 + 4.1
From the domestic market
2020 94.9 – 6.2 94.2 – 4.9 95.1 – 7.7 97.9 – 3.3 105.5 – 9.2 95.4 – 0.8
2021 115.5 +21.7 119.6 +27.0 113.1 +18.9 108.0 +10.3 114.9 + 8.9 105.6 +10.7
2022 122.7 + 6.2 135.4 +13.2 112.6 – 0.4 118.2 + 9.4 125.0 + 8.8 115.9 + 9.8
p 2023 117.5 – 4.2 123.7 – 8.6 113.7 + 1.0 107.3 – 9.2 111.8 –10.6 105.8 – 8.7
2022 Dec. 115.5 – 3.0 127.6 +14.4 108.6 –14.9 92.1 –12.6 99.3 – 2.6 89.7 –15.9
2023 Jan. 121.5 – 2.6 137.4 – 0.9 110.5 – 3.0 105.0 –10.7 105.7 – 9.0 104.8 –11.3
Feb. 125.8 + 2.0 133.3 + 0.8 121.4 + 4.3 111.8 – 5.6 113.6 – 3.4 111.2 – 6.3
Mar. 130.1 – 6.0 137.0 – 7.9 126.0 – 3.7 118.6 – 8.9 133.1 – 6.8 113.7 – 9.8
Apr. 117.5 – 4.9 132.5 – 4.3 106.9 – 2.6 102.9 –21.1 118.9 –13.7 97.5 –23.9
May 122.9 + 0.3 124.7 – 8.6 124.0 +10.7 104.9 – 7.3 110.5 –19.9 103.0 – 1.7
June 125.2 – 0.3 120.3 –12.2 132.6 +14.3 104.3 –16.4 103.1 –19.1 104.7 –15.4
July 114.4 – 8.1 118.2 –17.8 112.2 + 1.9 107.2 – 3.0 107.4 –13.9 107.1 + 1.3
Aug. 105.0 – 4.7 112.5 –10.0 98.5 + 0.6 106.2 – 1.8 112.0 – 7.7 104.3 + 0.6
Sep. 107.7 –10.8 112.7 –12.6 103.4 – 8.4 107.4 –14.6 118.2 – 4.3 103.7 –18.0
Oct. 111.4 – 7.5 120.3 –10.0 103.6 – 4.9 112.1 – 8.0 106.2 –14.1 114.1 – 5.8
Nov. 115.0 – 6.7 119.8 –10.9 112.1 – 1.1 107.4 –14.6 111.4 –13.1 106.0 –15.1
p Dec. 113.6 – 1.6 115.8 – 9.2 113.7 + 4.7 99.9 + 8.5 101.8 + 2.5 99.2 +10.6
From abroad
2020 98.9 – 8.1 102.0 – 5.8 95.9 –10.3 111.8 + 0.3 139.6 + 8.2 102.8 – 2.9
2021 122.2 +23.6 130.1 +27.5 118.2 +23.3 124.8 +11.6 171.9 +23.1 109.6 + 6.6
2022 128.8 + 5.4 141.6 + 8.8 121.8 + 3.0 137.4 +10.1 196.8 +14.5 118.2 + 7.8
p 2023 125.4 – 2.6 126.9 –10.4 123.4 + 1.3 135.9 – 1.1 174.8 –11.2 123.4 + 4.4
2022 Dec. 125.7 – 1.1 127.7 – 1.5 124.6 – 1.5 127.4 + 4.9 172.2 – 7.8 113.0 +12.5
2023 Jan. 129.1 – 7.3 141.2 – 6.0 122.7 – 8.9 135.5 + 1.6 159.7 –13.4 127.8 + 9.3
Feb. 131.3 – 1.2 134.2 – 5.0 129.2 + 0.6 136.7 – 0.2 186.5 + 1.9 120.7 – 1.2
Mar. 130.3 – 6.4 140.5 –11.0 124.0 – 3.3 143.2 – 8.9 196.9 –16.1 125.9 – 4.8
Apr. 114.6 – 7.0 124.3 –15.8 108.1 – 1.4 130.7 – 7.2 186.6 –18.8 112.7 + 0.4
May 120.3 – 3.8 124.2 –13.0 117.7 + 2.4 126.5 – 8.7 151.4 –28.4 118.5 + 3.1
June 145.2 + 9.9 137.1 – 7.5 148.8 +21.0 147.5 + 1.9 193.4 – 3.9 132.7 + 5.0
July 117.8 – 9.5 122.0 –14.9 113.6 – 8.5 136.4 + 6.1 145.6 –14.5 133.5 +16.0
Aug. 109.2 – 7.2 111.4 –15.6 104.2 – 4.5 143.9 + 8.2 182.8 – 5.2 131.3 +15.5
Sep. 128.2 + 1.8 129.1 – 4.7 127.7 + 6.8 129.1 – 8.6 164.5 –18.1 117.8 – 3.4
Oct. 120.5 – 6.8 123.8 – 9.0 117.2 – 6.6 135.2 + 0.4 176.8 –17.3 121.8 +11.7
Nov. 122.0 – 2.6 121.5 –11.0 119.5 + 0.3 144.9 + 9.5 206.0 +23.5 125.3 + 3.4
p Dec. 135.9 + 8.1 113.9 –10.8 148.1 +18.9 121.4 – 4.7 147.1 –14.6 113.2 + 0.2
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; for ex-
planatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables
III.2.a to III.2.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
69•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
4. Orders received by construction *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1
Structural engineering
Total TotalResidential
constructionIndustrial
constructionPublic sector
constructionCivil
engineering 
Industrial clientsPublic
sector  2
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2019 146.2 +8.2 145.3 +10.3 150.4 +9.7 142.6 +10.8 138.9 +10.9 147.1 +5.9 148.1 +8.8 141.3 +6.6
2020 145.6 –0.4 144.2 –0.8 160.8 +6.9 130.2 –8.7 141.5 +1.9 147.3 +0.1 139.6 –5.7 143.3 +1.4
2021 159.0 +9.2 164.1 +13.8 174.3 +8.4 156.6 +20.3 158.5 +12.0 153.0 +3.9 161.5 +15.7 146.7 +2.4
2022 166.8 +4.9 161.7 –1.5 167.7 –3.8 155.0 –1.0 166.8 +5.2 172.7 +12.9 171.9 +6.4 160.5 +9.4
2022 Nov. 148.3 +2.1 134.7 –5.7 130.9 –17.9 127.0 –4.2 176.1 +38.6 164.0 +10.7 155.2 –2.7 150.9 +25.3
Dec. 166.0 –10.3 162.2 –21.0 154.8 –21.1 165.4 –4.4 174.5 –50.9 170.4 +5.4 188.5 +1.0 146.9 –16.8
2023 Jan. 132.2 –7.4 125.7 –13.6 126.8 –23.5 128.4 –4.3 112.1 –7.5 139.7 –0.1 145.8 –2.3 119.8 –1.6
Feb. 151.8 –2.5 130.4 –19.0 127.4 –27.6 133.0 –15.9 130.9 +7.5 176.6 +18.1 167.6 +1.5 148.5 +12.1
Mar. 192.7 –8.0 179.4 –14.0 155.1 –29.3 197.1 –2.0 193.1 –3.5 208.2 –1.1 216.9 –0.1 187.8 –3.5
Apr. 169.9 +3.5 147.6 –6.4 144.6 –18.8 141.7 –0.8 179.7 +22.7 195.8 +14.0 178.4 +15.8 175.6 +4.8
May 176.1 +0.1 153.5 –10.8 153.9 –15.5 147.4 –9.6 175.1 +0.9 202.4 +12.3 187.5 +9.8 176.5 –0.9
June 181.0 +3.3 164.1 –1.3 165.3 –7.1 135.5 –11.6 266.8 +51.1 200.6 +8.1 178.6 +0.6 193.1 +12.9
July 194.4 +7.6 171.0 –4.7 160.9 –6.0 166.3 –6.6 221.6 +4.8 221.7 +21.7 190.6 +0.2 219.1 +24.8
Aug. 191.7 +21.9 153.7 +3.7 140.4 –3.2 156.6 +9.5 186.4 +4.7 235.8 +40.7 241.5 +54.9 165.7 –0.1
Sep. 192.8 +17.4 184.4 +15.7 145.1 –10.7 191.4 +24.4 288.2 +70.0 202.6 +19.2 223.9 +34.8 186.2 +14.1
Oct. 171.3 +5.9 145.2 +0.1 143.3 –3.4 141.5 +0.9 164.9 +7.8 201.6 +11.2 197.1 +14.3 158.6 +0.4
Nov. 147.1 –0.8 137.2 +1.9 124.2 –5.1 140.4 +10.6 168.0 –4.6 158.6 –3.3 170.0 +9.5 134.7 –10.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; exclu-
ding value added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series – Seasonally adjustedbusiness statistics, Table III.2.f.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Excluding residential
construction.  2 Including road construction.
5. Retail trade turnover *
Adjusted for calendar variations o
of which:
In stores by enterprises main product range
Total 
Food, beverages,
tobacco  1Textiles,
clothing,
foodwear and
leather goodsInformation
and
communications
equipmentConstruction
and flooring
materials,
household
appliances,
furnitureRetail sale of
pharmaceutical
and medical
goods, cosmetic
and toilet
articlesRetail sale via
mail order houses
or via internet
as well as
other retail sale  2
At current
prices At 2015 prices At current prices
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2020 121.4 +5.6 115.9 +4.4 121.3 +8.1 81.9 –23.2 106.9 –1.8 117.1 +9.3 125.4 +5.6 168.6 +21.8
2021 124.7 +2.7 116.7 +0.7 121.7 +0.3 78.1 –4.6 95.4 –10.8 110.4 –5.7 135.2 +7.8 190.1 +12.8
3 2022 134.3 +7.7 115.8 –0.8 128.2 +5.3 102.9 +31.8 107.8 +13.0 122.8 +11.2 144.7 +7.0 188.8 –0.7
4 2023 137.7 +2.5 112.3 –3.0 136.1 +6.2 106.8 +3.8 107.2 –0.6 118.4 –3.6 149.3 +3.2 186.3 –1.3
2022 Dec. 151.3 +4.1 125.7 –6.4 147.1 +6.9 124.2 +27.3 147.7 –0.1 125.5 +2.9 157.3 +1.0 213.1 –4.4
2023 Jan. 124.3 +2.1 103.7 –7.0 123.0 +4.7 84.7 +17.8 110.8 –0.7 105.8 –3.0 139.8 –1.5 173.4 –2.9
Feb. 123.4 +2.9 101.8 –6.5 123.5 +6.5 83.4 +14.1 99.7 +3.0 108.3 –4.0 135.5 +0.2 169.1 –0.2
Mar. 139.6 +0.9 114.1 –7.2 137.8 +5.3 100.3 +5.2 106.5 +3.9 129.4 –4.8 150.1 +0.2 188.9 –0.5
Apr. 138.0 +4.1 112.2 –3.8 137.5 +8.3 107.9 +6.1 94.8 +0.2 126.4 –3.2 144.1 +2.6 182.0 –1.4
May 141.3 +4.8 114.9 –1.5 140.0 +9.6 113.3 +3.0 91.8 +0.9 128.0 –1.2 147.9 +3.9 183.5 +1.0
June 138.2 +5.5 112.4 –0.4 137.1 +8.2 117.5 +11.3 95.3 +1.0 120.5 +0.3 148.4 +6.0 178.4 +2.2
July 139.6 +3.2 113.9 –1.7 140.2 +7.3 109.1 +3.3 98.2 –2.0 118.4 –3.3 152.8 +3.9 181.6 –2.0
Aug. 132.9 +2.4 108.1 –2.0 133.2 +5.5 102.6 +4.5 97.5 –1.5 111.3 –1.9 145.5 +4.4 170.0 –1.7
Sep. 133.4 +0.3 107.7 –3.6 132.6 +6.4 105.1 –10.2 104.2 –4.1 112.4 –5.2 149.7 +3.7 170.8 –9.7
Oct. 142.0 +3.0 114.9 +0.3 137.4 +4.1 121.9 +5.1 111.0 –0.8 121.7 –3.0 156.4 +7.5 196.8 +1.8
Nov. 147.7 +1.0 120.0 –1.6 138.0 +4.3 117.9 +1.8 135.5 +0.4 121.9 –6.4 156.2 +2.0 231.1 –1.0
4 Dec. 152.3 +0.7 123.4 –1.8 152.5 +3.7 117.4 –5.5 141.5 –4.2 117.0 –6.8 165.7 +5.3 209.6 –1.6
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * Excluding value added tax;
for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics,
Table III.4.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Including stalls and markets.  2 Excludingstores, stalls and markets.  3 As of January 2022 figures are provisional and particularly
uncertain in recent months due to estimates for missing reports.  4 Unadjusted figures
partially estimated by the Federal Statistical Office.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
70•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
6. Labour market *
Employment  1 Employment subject to social contributions  2 Short-time workers  3 Unemployment  4
Total of which: of which: of which:
Produc-
tion 
sectorServices 
excluding 
temporary 
employ-
mentTemporary 
employ-
mentSolely
jobs
exempt
from
social
contri-
butions  2TotalCyclically
induced TotalAssigned
to the
legal
category
of the
Third Book
of the
Social
Security
Code
(SGB III)
PeriodThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
changeThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
change ThousandsUnem-
ploy-
ment
rate 
in %  4,5Vacan-
cies, 
thou-
sands  4,6
2019 45,276 +0.9 33,518 +1.7 9,479 23,043 751 4,579 145 60 72,267 827 7 5.0 774
2020 44,915 –0.8 33,579 +0.2 9,395 23,277 660 4,290 2,939 2,847 2,695 1,137 5.9 613
2021 44,984 +0.2 33,897 +0.9 9,344 23,602 702 4,101 1,852 1,744 2,613 999 5.7 706
2022 45,596 +1.4 34,507 +1.8 9,400 24,135 721 4,125 426 337 2,418 808 5.3 845
2023 845,933 8 +0.7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,609 875 5.7 761
2020 Q4 44,994 –1.3 33,836 –0.3 9,395 23,518 676 4,194 2,433 2,361 2,722 1,167 5.9 595
2021 Q1 44,518 –1.4 33,568 –0.2 9,294 23,376 665 4,051 3,473 3,157 2,878 1,248 6.3 586
Q2 44,815 +0.2 33,718 +0.9 9,322 23,446 697 4,066 2,164 2,143 2,691 1,024 5.9 658
Q3 45,161 +0.8 33,929 +1.5 9,347 23,606 719 4,161 935 915 2,545 920 5.5 774
Q4 45,443 +1.0 34,374 +1.6 9,415 23,982 727 4,125 835 762 2,341 802 5.1 804
2022 Q1 45,199 +1.5 34,242 +2.0 9,348 23,943 715 4,061 1,033 792 2,417 874 5.3 818
Q2 45,519 +1.6 34,401 +2.0 9,372 24,056 718 4,112 337 324 2,311 777 5.0 864
Q3 45,707 +1.2 34,522 +1.7 9,405 24,133 724 4,159 103 92 2,501 804 5.5 880
Q4 45,959 +1.1 34,864 +1.4 9,475 24,409 730 4,166 229 139 2,443 778 5.3 817
2023 Q1 r45,638 r +1.0 34,614 +1.1 9,395 24,288 696 4,152 430 153 2,610 900 5.7 773
Q2 r45,906 r +0.9 34,702 +0.9 9,410 24,352 687 4,209 152 146 2,561 839 9 5.6 770
Q3 r46,014 r +0.7 1034,763 10+0.7 109,421 1024,399 10 687 104,241 ... 10 120 2,647 885 5.7 768
Q4 846,175 8 +0.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,617 874 5.7 732
2020 Sep. 44,991 –1.2 33,792 –0.4 9,421 23,454 656 4,240 2,244 2,229 2,847 1,238 6.2 591
Oct. 45,076 –1.1 33,862 –0.3 9,410 23,530 671 4,229 2,037 2,021 2,760 1,183 6.0 602
Nov. 45,031 –1.3 33,899 –0.2 9,400 23,559 696 4,166 2,405 2,386 2,699 1,152 5.9 601
Dec. 44,874 –1.3 33,700 –0.1 9,327 23,478 666 4,134 2,856 2,676 2,707 1,166 5.9 581
2021 Jan. 44,493 –1.5 33,515 –0.3 9,282 23,347 657 4,045 3,638 3,294 2,901 1,298 6.3 566
Feb. 44,490 –1.5 33,521 –0.3 9,281 23,343 662 4,026 3,766 3,358 2,904 1,270 6.3 583
Mar. 44,570 –1.1 33,636 –0.0 9,309 23,397 685 4,032 3,016 2,818 2,827 1,177 6.2 609
Apr. 44,680 –0.3 33,689 +0.8 9,324 23,427 687 4,039 2,583 2,560 2,771 1,091 6.0 629
May 44,799 +0.3 33,747 +1.3 9,326 23,461 703 4,067 2,342 2,320 2,687 1,020 5.9 654
June 44,966 +0.6 33,802 +1.4 9,324 23,504 716 4,151 1,568 1,548 2,614 961 5.7 693
July 45,030 +0.7 33,731 +1.5 9,304 23,458 715 4,194 1,088 1,068 2,590 956 5.6 744
Aug. 45,101 +0.8 33,994 +1.5 9,358 23,658 722 4,153 857 838 2,578 940 5.6 779
Sep. 45,352 +0.8 34,323 +1.6 9,432 23,903 726 4,123 859 839 2,465 864 5.4 799
Oct. 45,440 +0.8 34,369 +1.5 9,425 23,965 724 4,123 780 762 2,377 814 5.2 809
Nov. 45,496 +1.0 34,449 +1.6 9,423 24,039 739 4,133 767 750 2,317 789 5.1 808
Dec. 45,393 +1.2 34,284 +1.7 9,364 23,980 708 4,112 957 772 2,330 803 5.1 794
2022 Jan. 45,126 +1.4 34,176 +2.0 9,332 23,900 711 4,048 1,123 847 2,462 903 5.4 792
Feb. 45,187 +1.6 34,243 +2.2 9,346 23,939 719 4,049 1,087 803 2,428 884 5.3 822
Mar. 45,284 +1.6 34,334 +2.1 9,369 23,999 719 4,061 888 727 2,362 835 5.1 839
Apr. 45,399 +1.6 34,368 +2.0 9,366 24,037 713 4,091 453 439 2,309 800 5.0 852
May 45,536 +1.6 34,445 +2.1 9,376 24,089 719 4,131 318 305 2,260 771 4.9 865
June 45,623 +1.5 34,445 +1.9 9,376 24,084 724 4,164 241 228 2,363 761 5.2 877
July 45,584 +1.2 34,322 +1.8 9,361 23,988 718 4,176 115 102 2,470 801 5.4 881
Aug. 45,643 +1.2 34,571 +1.7 9,417 24,169 725 4,151 87 76 2,547 827 5.6 887
Sep. 45,894 +1.2 34,899 +1.7 9,499 24,401 733 4,136 108 97 2,486 782 5.4 873
Oct. 45,990 +1.2 34,893 +1.5 9,489 24,414 734 4,161 134 124 2,442 764 5.3 846
Nov. 46,006 +1.1 34,897 +1.3 9,478 24,435 738 4,179 156 147 2,434 770 5.3 823
Dec. 45,882 +1.1 34,705 +1.2 9,414 24,357 704 4,182 397 146 2,454 799 5.4 781
2023 Jan. r45,570 r +1.0 34,550 +1.1 9,381 24,240 697 4,138 451 145 2,616 911 5.7 764
Feb. r45,632 r +1.0 34,601 +1.0 9,392 24,279 692 4,148 441 157 2,620 910 5.7 778
Mar. r45,713 r +0.9 34,679 +1.0 9,412 24,332 692 4,157 398 159 2,594 878 5.7 777
Apr. r45,808 r +0.9 34,685 +0.9 9,410 24,342 684 4,188 146 139 2,586 855 5.7 773
May r45,920 r +0.8 34,728 +0.8 9,413 24,371 687 4,228 149 142 2,544 829 9 5.5 767
June r45,989 r +0.8 34,709 +0.8 9,404 24,357 690 4,266 162 156 2,555 833 5.5 769
July r45,957 r +0.8 34,584 +0.8 9,382 24,261 687 4,279 113 107 2,617 878 5.7 772
Aug. r45,942 r +0.7 1034,802 10+0.7 109,428 1024,433 10 686 104,219 ... 10 107 2,696 910 5.8 771
Sep. r46,143 r +0.5 1035,094 10+0.6 109,501 1024,647 10 685 104,183 ... 10 147 2,627 869 5.7 761
Oct. r46,209 r +0.5 1035,117 10+0.6 109,491 1024,688 10 687 104,180 ... 10 170 2,607 861 5.7 749
Nov. r46,226 r +0.5 1035,114 10+0.6 109,473 1024,711 10 687 104,196 ... 10 181 2,606 865 5.6 733
Dec. 846,089 8 +0.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,637 896 5.7 713
2024 Jan. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,805 1,006 6.1 699
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency.  * Annual and quarterly
figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the official figures are
due to rounding.  1 Workplace concept; averages.  2 Monthly figures: end of month.
3 Number within a given month.  4 Mid-month level.  5 Relative to the total civilian
labour force.  6 Excluding government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs,
including jobs located abroad.  7 Statistical break due to late recording of unemployed
persons in the legal category of the Second Book of the Social Security Code (SGB II).8 Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statistical Office.  9 From May 2023, calcu-
lated on the basis of new labour force figures.  10 Unadjusted figures estimated by the
Federal Employment Agency. In 2021 and 2022, the estimated values for Germany de-
viated from the final data by a maximum of 0.1% for employees subject to social con-
tributions, by a maximum of 0.5% for persons solely in jobs exempt from social contri-
butions, and by a maximum of 61,3% for cyclically induced short-time work.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
71•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
7. Prices
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
of which: Indices of
foreign trade prices
of which:
Total Food  1,2Non-
energy
industrial
goods  1 Energy  1 Services  1Actual
rents
for
housingMemo item:
Consumer
price index
(national
concept)Con-
struction
price
indexIndex of
producer
prices of
industrial
products
sold on
the
domestic
market  3Index of
producer
prices of
agri-
cultural
products  3 Exports Imports
Period 2015 = 100 2020 = 100 2015 = 100 2020 = 100 2015 = 100
Index level
2020 4 105.8 4 110.9 4 104.1 4 99.0 4 106.9 107.6 4 100.0 4 117.0 103.8 100.0 101.7 97.3
2021 4 109.2 4 114.1 4 106.7 4 109.0 4 109.0 109.0 4 103.1 4 127.0 114.7 107.0 107.4 110.4
2022 118.7 126.2 112.7 146.8 112.2 110.8 110.2 148.3 152.4 141.2 123.1 139.4
2023 125.9 140.9 119.1 154.2 117.6 113.1 116.7 161.2 148.8 5 141.3 122.7 127.8
2022 Mar. 116.1 119.1 110.4 146.1 110.6 110.2 108.1 141.2 136.7 120.7 135.9
Apr. 116.9 122.2 111.3 142.7 111.7 110.4 108.8 145.2 143.8 121.7 138.3
May 118.2 124.2 112.3 146.7 112.0 110.6 109.8 147.9 147.5 143.1 122.4 139.5
June 118.1 125.4 112.5 147.8 111.0 110.8 109.8 148.4 141.7 123.5 140.9
July 119.0 127.6 112.6 147.8 112.1 110.9 110.3 156.3 142.1 126.0 142.9
Aug. 119.5 129.1 113.0 148.6 112.2 111.1 110.7 151.7 168.6 144.8 128.7 149.1
Sep. 122.1 130.9 114.5 158.8 113.9 111.2 112.7 172.5 148.7 127.9 147.8
Oct. 123.5 132.2 115.8 164.5 114.3 111.4 113.5 165.2 151.7 125.5 146.0
Nov. 123.5 133.6 116.3 163.5 113.7 111.6 113.7 155.4 158.7 152.3 124.9 139.4
Dec. 122.0 134.6 116.6 143.9 114.8 111.7 113.2 158.1 152.4 125.0 137.1
2023 Jan. 122.6 136.7 116.4 154.8 113.8 112.1 114.3 154.8 5 150.0 124.0 135.4
Feb. 123.8 139.5 117.0 154.9 115.0 112.2 115.2 159.7 152.8 149.0 123.8 132.2
Mar. 125.1 141.3 118.3 155.0 116.1 112.5 116.1 150.6 145.0 123.5 130.8
Apr. 125.8 141.1 119.0 156.1 117.1 112.6 116.6 151.1 142.2 123.0 128.6
May 125.6 141.1 119.3 154.0 116.9 112.8 116.5 161.0 149.0 139.4 122.5 126.8
June 126.1 141.2 119.5 153.7 117.8 113.0 116.8 148.6 141.6 122.4 124.8
July 126.7 141.2 118.8 153.6 119.6 113.2 117.1 147.0 142.8 122.0 124.1
Aug. 127.2 141.0 119.2 156.5 119.8 113.5 117.5 161.6 147.4 142.8 122.1 124.6
Sep. 127.4 141.5 120.1 157.6 119.3 113.6 117.8 147.1 137.9 122.6 126.6
Oct. 127.2 141.6 120.5 154.7 119.1 113.7 117.8 147.0 135.4 122.5 127.0
Nov. 126.3 142.4 120.5 151.6 117.6 113.9 117.3 162.4 146.2 135.7 122.2 126.9
Dec. 126.6 142.4 120.5 148.4 118.7 114.0 117.4 144.5 137.3 122.0 125.5
2024 Jan. 126.4 143.7 119.7 150.2 118.1 114.4 117.6 ... ... ... ...
Annual percentage change
2020 4 +0.4 4+ 2.3 4– 0.1 4– 4.5 4+ 1.2 + 1.4 4 +0.5 4+ 1.4 – 1.0 – 3.1 – 0.7 – 4.3
2021 4 +3.2 4+ 2.9 4+ 2.5 4+ 10.1 4+ 2.0 + 1.3 4 +3.1 4+ 8.6 +10.5 + 7.0 + 5.6 +13.5
2022 +8.7 + 10.6 + 5.7 + 34.7 + 2.9 + 1.7 +6.9 +16.8 +32.9 +32.0 +14.6 +26.3
2023 +6.0 + 11.7 + 5.6 + 5.1 + 4.8 + 2.1 +5.9 + 8.7 – 2.4 5+ 0.1 – 0.3 – 8.3
2022 Mar. +7.6 + 5.3 + 4.4 + 37.6 + 2.8 + 1.5 +5.9 +30.9 +31.9 +15.9 +31.2
Apr. +7.8 + 6.7 + 5.2 + 34.5 + 3.1 + 1.6 +6.3 +33.5 +36.3 +16.0 +31.7
May +8.7 + 8.8 + 5.6 + 37.5 + 3.0 + 1.6 +7.0 +18.2 +33.6 +33.0 +15.9 +30.6
June +8.2 + 9.9 + 5.6 + 37.4 + 1.7 + 1.7 +6.7 +32.7 +32.3 +16.1 +29.9
July +8.5 + 11.5 + 5.8 + 35.6 + 1.7 + 1.6 +6.7 +37.2 +31.8 +17.0 +28.9
Aug. +8.8 + 12.8 + 6.1 + 35.8 + 1.7 + 1.7 +7.0 +17.2 +45.8 +33.3 +18.6 +32.7
Sep. +10.9 + 14.4 + 6.4 + 44.2 + 3.6 + 1.7 +8.6 +45.8 +39.1 +16.8 +29.8
Oct. +11.6 + 15.5 + 7.2 + 43.5 + 3.9 + 1.7 +8.8 +34.5 +38.8 +13.1 +23.5
Nov. +11.3 + 16.3 + 7.3 + 40.1 + 3.8 + 1.9 +8.8 +17.5 +28.2 +34.2 +11.6 +14.5
Dec. +9.6 + 16.3 + 7.4 + 25.1 + 4.1 + 1.9 +8.1 +21.6 +32.8 +10.6 +12.6
2023 Jan. +9.2 + 16.6 + 7.4 + 25.1 + 3.6 + 2.0 +8.7 +16.6 5+28.1 + 7.8 + 6.6
Feb. +9.3 + 18.0 + 7.2 + 21.6 + 4.4 + 2.0 +8.7 +15.6 +13.5 +23.1 + 6.6 + 2.8
Mar. +7.8 + 18.6 + 7.2 + 6.1 + 5.0 + 2.1 +7.4 + 6.7 + 6.1 + 2.3 – 3.8
Apr. +7.6 + 15.5 + 6.9 + 9.4 + 4.8 + 2.0 +7.2 + 4.1 – 1.1 + 1.1 – 7.0
May +6.3 + 13.6 + 6.2 + 5.0 + 4.4 + 2.0 +6.1 + 8.9 + 1.0 – 2.6 + 0.1 – 9.1
June +6.8 + 12.6 + 6.2 + 4.0 + 6.1 + 2.0 +6.4 + 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.9 –11.4
July +6.5 + 10.7 + 5.5 + 3.9 + 6.7 + 2.1 +6.2 – 6.0 + 0.5 – 3.2 –13.2
Aug. +6.4 + 9.2 + 5.5 + 5.3 + 6.8 + 2.2 +6.1 + 6.5 –12.6 – 1.4 – 5.1 –16.4
Sep. +4.3 + 8.1 + 4.9 – 0.8 + 4.7 + 2.2 +4.5 –14.7 – 7.3 – 4.1 –14.3
Oct. +3.0 + 7.1 + 4.1 – 6.0 + 4.2 + 2.1 +3.8 –11.0 –10.7 – 2.4 –13.0
Nov. +2.3 + 6.6 + 3.6 – 7.3 + 3.4 + 2.1 +3.2 + 4.5 – 7.9 –10.9 – 2.2 – 9.0
Dec. +3.8 + 5.8 + 3.3 + 3.1 + 3.4 + 2.1 +3.7 – 8.6 – 9.9 – 2.4 – 8.5
2024 Jan. +3.1 + 5.1 + 2.8 – 3.0 + 3.8 + 2.1 +2.9 ... ... ... ...
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data
from the Federal Statistical Office.  1 The last data point is at times based on the Bun-
desbank’s own estimates.  2 Including alcoholic beverages and tobacco.  3 Excluding va-lue added tax.  4 Influenced by a temporary reduction of value added tax between July
and December 2020.  5 From January 2023 onwards, provisional figures.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
72•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
8. Households' income *
Gross wages and
salaries  1Net wages and
salaries  2Monetary social
benefits received  3 Mass income  4 Disposable income  5 Saving  6Saving
ratio  7
Period € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
changeAs
percentage
2015 1,285.5 4.2 863.3 4.0 410.5 4.2 1,273.8 4.0 1,782.3 2.8 179.4 5.1 10.1
2016 1,337.4 4.0 896.3 3.8 426.2 3.8 1,322.5 3.8 1,841.5 3.3 187.8 4.7 10.2
2017 1,395.4 4.3 932.5 4.0 441.8 3.6 1,374.3 3.9 1,905.2 3.5 202.8 8.0 10.6
2018 1,462.7 4.8 976.1 4.7 455.2 3.0 1,431.3 4.1 1,976.6 3.7 223.2 10.1 11.3
2019 1,524.7 4.2 1,021.8 4.7 477.5 4.9 1,499.3 4.8 2,024.4 2.4 219.8 – 1.5 10.9
2020 1,515.3 – 0.6 1,021.1 – 0.1 523.9 9.7 1,545.0 3.0 2,046.9 1.1 338.2 53.9 16.5
2021 1,571.3 3.7 1,062.9 4.1 534.1 1.9 1,597.0 3.4 2,098.5 2.5 313.0 – 7.5 14.9
2022 1,661.8 5.8 1,118.8 5.3 541.8 1.4 1,660.6 4.0 2,227.5 6.1 248.2 –20.7 11.1
2022 Q2 399.3 5.8 262.3 4.6 132.0 – 2.4 394.3 2.2 544.2 5.0 55.9 –34.3 10.3
Q3 410.2 4.3 282.7 4.1 138.5 5.3 421.2 4.5 565.8 8.4 54.6 1.3 9.6
Q4 463.0 5.5 312.0 5.4 136.6 5.5 448.6 5.5 575.1 7.4 60.2 – 1.1 10.5
2023 Q1 416.8 7.1 285.9 9.2 143.8 6.7 429.7 8.4 580.0 6.9 78.0 0.6 13.4
Q2 429.5 7.6 287.7 9.7 141.0 6.8 428.7 8.7 582.8 7.1 65.1 16.5 11.2
Q3 440.1 7.3 307.5 8.8 145.8 5.3 453.3 7.6 591.8 4.6 61.2 12.1 10.3
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2023.  * Households in-
cluding non-profit institutions serving households.  1 Residence concept.  2 After
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees'
contributions to the social security funds.  3 Social security benefits in cash from the
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, pension
payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social
benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges.  4 Net wages and salaries plusmonetary social benefits received.  5 Mass income plus operating surplus, mixed
income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of non-profit
institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax and consumption-related
taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in claims on company
pension funds.  6 Including the increase in claims on company pension funds.  7 Saving
as a percentage of disposable income.
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
Index of negotiated wages  1
On a monthly basis
On an hourly basis TotalTotal excluding
one-off payments Basic pay rates  2Memo item:
Wages and salaries
per employee  3
Period 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change 2015=100Annual
percentage
change
2015 100.0 2.4 100.0 2.4 100.0 2.4 100.0 2.5 100.0 2.9
2016 102.2 2.2 102.2 2.2 102.2 2.2 102.3 2.3 102.5 2.5
2017 104.6 2.3 104.5 2.3 104.6 2.3 104.8 2.4 105.1 2.6
2018 107.7 3.0 107.7 3.0 107.6 2.8 107.7 2.8 108.4 3.2
2019 110.9 3.0 110.8 3.0 110.7 2.9 110.4 2.5 111.7 3.0
2020 113.3 2.2 113.3 2.2 113.0 2.1 112.7 2.1 111.6 – 0.1
2021 115.0 1.5 115.0 1.5 114.9 1.7 114.5 1.5 115.3 3.3
2022 118.0 2.6 118.0 2.6 117.3 2.2 116.8 2.0 120.1 4.1
2022 Q3 121.0 2.5 120.9 2.5 120.9 2.4 117.0 2.1 118.5 2.9
Q4 130.2 1.9 130.1 1.9 130.1 1.9 117.8 2.3 132.6 4.2
2023 Q1 115.2 3.8 115.1 3.8 111.7 2.5 118.7 2.6 120.1 5.9
Q2 114.3 3.9 114.2 3.9 112.1 2.5 119.5 2.5 123.2 6.5
Q3 126.6 4.7 126.6 4.7 124.8 3.2 120.4 2.9 126.1 6.4
Q4 134.8 3.6 134.8 3.6 133.3 2.5 120.7 2.5 . .
2023 June 117.4 7.7 117.4 7.6 112.3 2.9 120.1 2.9 . .
July 151.0 4.9 151.0 4.8 148.9 3.6 120.3 2.9 . .
Aug. 114.2 4.3 114.2 4.3 112.8 2.9 120.4 2.9 . .
Sep. 114.6 4.8 114.6 4.8 112.7 3.0 120.5 3.0 . .
Oct. 115.1 4.6 115.1 4.6 112.8 2.6 120.6 2.6 . .
Nov. 173.4 3.2 173.4 3.2 172.4 2.5 120.7 2.6 . .
Dec. 116.0 3.3 116.0 3.2 114.8 2.3 120.8 2.3 . .
1 Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports.  2 Excluding
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such as
annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13th monthly salary payment) andretirement provisions).  3 Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
November 2023.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
73•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
End of year/half
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which: of which: Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which:
PeriodTotal
assetsNon-
current
assetsIntangible
assetsTangible
assetsFinancial
assetsCurrent
assetsInven-
toriesTrade
receiv-
ables Cash  1 Equity Total Totalof which:
Financial
debt TotalFinancial
debtTrade
payables
Total (€ billion)
2019 2,800.6 1,769.7 586.3 737.1 333.4 1,030.9 257.5 237.6 168.4 821.0 1,979.6 1,091.2 676.3 888.4 289.8 207.6
2020 2,850.0 1,797.3 607.6 733.1 335.1 1,052.7 243.6 225.9 240.5 811.5 2,038.5 1,181.5 746.4 857.0 304.4 196.1
2021 3,292.0 1,971.6 680.1 773.8 384.8 1,320.4 272.1 261.5 261.5 994.4 2,297.6 1,206.9 772.1 1,090.7 321.4 236.7
2022 3,431.6 2,057.0 713.5 804.3 410.1 1,374.6 326.2 268.3 244.3 1,133.2 2,298.4 1,195.7 760.2 1,102.8 331.8 273.3
2021 H2 3,292.0 1,971.6 680.1 773.8 384.8 1,320.4 272.1 261.5 261.5 994.4 2,297.6 1,206.9 772.1 1,090.7 321.4 236.7
2022 H1 3,593.6 2,108.1 719.1 796.3 447.4 1,485.5 322.4 284.8 225.4 1,075.4 2,518.2 1,237.0 789.5 1,281.2 313.7 260.7
H2 3,431.6 2,057.0 713.5 804.3 410.1 1,374.6 326.2 268.3 244.3 1,133.2 2,298.4 1,195.7 760.2 1,102.8 331.8 273.3
p 2023 H1 3,322.4 2,009.5 699.5 799.0 373.5 1,312.9 343.9 263.7 234.3 1,134.0 2,188.3 1,130.8 752.5 1,057.5 327.4 259.9
As a percentage of total assets
2019 100.0 63.2 20.9 26.3 11.9 36.8 9.2 8.5 6.0 29.3 70.7 39.0 24.2 31.7 10.4 7.4
2020 100.0 63.1 21.3 25.7 11.8 36.9 8.6 7.9 8.4 28.5 71.5 41.5 26.2 30.1 10.7 6.9
2021 100.0 59.9 20.7 23.5 11.7 40.1 8.3 7.9 7.9 30.2 69.8 36.7 23.5 33.1 9.8 7.2
2022 100.0 59.9 20.8 23.4 12.0 40.1 9.5 7.8 7.1 33.0 67.0 34.8 22.2 32.1 9.7 8.0
2021 H2 100.0 59.9 20.7 23.5 11.7 40.1 8.3 7.9 7.9 30.2 69.8 36.7 23.5 33.1 9.8 7.2
2022 H1 100.0 58.7 20.0 22.2 12.5 41.3 9.0 7.9 6.3 29.9 70.1 34.4 22.0 35.7 8.7 7.3
H2 100.0 59.9 20.8 23.4 12.0 40.1 9.5 7.8 7.1 33.0 67.0 34.8 22.2 32.1 9.7 8.0
p 2023 H1 100.0 60.5 21.1 24.1 11.2 39.5 10.4 7.9 7.1 34.1 65.9 34.0 22.7 31.8 9.9 7.8
Groups with a focus on the production sector (€ billion) 2
2019 2,302.9 1,396.4 419.6 565.4 319.7 906.5 243.8 188.5 136.8 662.2 1,640.7 887.5 523.8 753.2 257.5 158.0
2020 2,265.0 1,354.9 399.1 543.5 320.0 910.1 228.7 179.5 187.9 636.3 1,628.8 904.7 537.0 724.0 267.3 149.8
2021 2,626.3 1,479.3 441.7 573.9 363.5 1,147.0 254.4 206.3 204.2 764.7 1,861.6 918.5 548.5 943.2 285.9 184.0
2022 2,730.8 1,538.3 461.5 591.7 388.3 1,192.4 307.7 209.1 186.5 879.7 1,851.1 912.7 534.3 938.4 291.2 215.2
2021 H2 2,626.3 1,479.3 441.7 573.9 363.5 1,147.0 254.4 206.3 204.2 764.7 1,861.6 918.5 548.5 943.2 285.9 184.0
2022 H1 2,898.3 1,582.5 462.4 583.8 422.6 1,315.9 303.6 222.5 177.2 830.9 2,067.4 945.2 558.2 1,122.2 272.8 207.6
H2 2,730.8 1,538.3 461.5 591.7 388.3 1,192.4 307.7 209.1 186.5 879.7 1,851.1 912.7 534.3 938.4 291.2 215.2
p 2023 H1 2,651.0 1,504.1 460.3 588.8 348.8 1,146.8 326.4 210.9 183.6 892.6 1,758.4 854.6 532.3 903.8 282.9 210.1
As a percentage of total assets
2019 100.0 60.6 18.2 24.6 13.9 39.4 10.6 8.2 5.9 28.8 71.3 38.5 22.7 32.7 11.2 6.9
2020 100.0 59.8 17.6 24.0 14.1 40.2 10.1 7.9 8.3 28.1 71.9 39.9 23.7 32.0 11.8 6.6
2021 100.0 56.3 16.8 21.9 13.8 43.7 9.7 7.9 7.8 29.1 70.9 35.0 20.9 35.9 10.9 7.0
2022 100.0 56.3 16.9 21.7 14.2 43.7 11.3 7.7 6.8 32.2 67.8 33.4 19.6 34.4 10.7 7.9
2021 H2 100.0 56.3 16.8 21.9 13.8 43.7 9.7 7.9 7.8 29.1 70.9 35.0 20.9 35.9 10.9 7.0
2022 H1 100.0 54.6 16.0 20.1 14.6 45.4 10.5 7.7 6.1 28.7 71.3 32.6 19.3 38.7 9.4 7.2
H2 100.0 56.3 16.9 21.7 14.2 43.7 11.3 7.7 6.8 32.2 67.8 33.4 19.6 34.4 10.7 7.9
p 2023 H1 100.0 56.7 17.4 22.2 13.2 43.3 12.3 8.0 6.9 33.7 66.3 32.2 20.1 34.1 10.7 7.9
Groups with a focus on the services sector (€ billion)  
2019 497.7 373.3 166.7 171.8 13.7 124.4 13.7 49.1 31.6 158.8 338.9 203.8 152.6 135.1 32.3 49.6
2020 585.0 442.4 208.5 189.6 15.1 142.6 14.9 46.4 52.6 175.3 409.7 276.7 209.4 133.0 37.1 46.3
2021 665.7 492.2 238.5 200.0 21.3 173.5 17.7 55.2 57.3 229.7 436.0 288.4 223.6 147.6 35.5 52.6
2022 700.9 518.7 251.9 212.5 21.8 182.2 18.5 59.1 57.8 253.5 447.3 283.0 225.9 164.3 40.7 58.1
2021 H2 665.7 492.2 238.5 200.0 21.3 173.5 17.7 55.2 57.3 229.7 436.0 288.4 223.6 147.6 35.5 52.6
2022 H1 695.3 525.7 256.7 212.5 24.8 169.6 18.8 62.2 48.2 244.5 450.8 291.8 231.4 159.0 40.9 53.1
H2 700.9 518.7 251.9 212.5 21.8 182.2 18.5 59.1 57.8 253.5 447.3 283.0 225.9 164.3 40.7 58.1
p 2023 H1 671.4 505.4 239.2 210.2 24.7 166.0 17.4 52.9 50.7 241.5 429.9 276.2 220.1 153.8 44.6 49.9
As a percentage of total assets
2019 100.0 75.0 33.5 34.5 2.8 25.0 2.8 9.9 6.4 31.9 68.1 41.0 30.7 27.2 6.5 10.0
2020 100.0 75.6 35.6 32.4 2.6 24.4 2.6 7.9 9.0 30.0 70.0 47.3 35.8 22.7 6.3 7.9
2021 100.0 73.9 35.8 30.0 3.2 26.1 2.7 8.3 8.6 34.5 65.5 43.3 33.6 22.2 5.3 7.9
2022 100.0 74.0 36.0 30.3 3.1 26.0 2.6 8.4 8.3 36.2 63.8 40.4 32.2 23.5 5.8 8.3
2021 H2 100.0 73.9 35.8 30.0 3.2 26.1 2.7 8.3 8.6 34.5 65.5 43.3 33.6 22.2 5.3 7.9
2022 H1 100.0 75.6 36.9 30.6 3.6 24.4 2.7 9.0 6.9 35.2 64.8 42.0 33.3 22.9 5.9 7.6
H2 100.0 74.0 36.0 30.3 3.1 26.0 2.6 8.4 8.3 36.2 63.8 40.4 32.2 23.5 5.8 8.3
p 2023 H1 100.0 75.3 35.6 31.3 3.7 24.7 2.6 7.9 7.6 36.0 64.0 41.1 32.8 22.9 6.6 7.4
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Including cash equivalents.  2 Includ-
ing groups in agriculture and forestry.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
74•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-
sation (EBITDA  1 ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Distribution  2 Distribution  2
RevenuesOperating income
before depreciation
and amortisation
(EBITDA  1 )Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartileOperating
income (EBIT)Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartile
Period € billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4€ billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  4% % % € billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  4% % %
Total
2015 1,633.9 6.9 195.9 – 1.1 12.0 – 1.0 6.3 10.6 17.8 91.5 – 16.4 5.6 – 1.5 1.8 6.7 11.3
2016 1,624.3 – 0.4 214.4 7.8 13.2 1.0 6.7 11.4 17.9 111.7 9.0 6.9 0.5 2.6 6.7 12.0
2017 1,719.3 5.1 243.4 14.6 14.2 1.2 7.0 11.0 18.0 141.9 33.3 8.3 1.8 2.5 6.8 12.1
6 2018 1,706.8 0.7 232.8 – 0.9 13.6 – 0.2 6.1 10.6 17.8 129.2 – 6.3 7.6 – 0.6 2.1 6.5 11.9
2019 1,764.6 2.6 233.6 0.4 13.2 – 0.3 6.9 12.2 19.2 105.5 – 17.9 6.0 – 1.5 1.6 5.8 11.8
2020 1,632.8 – 8.8 213.6 – 7.7 13.1 0.2 6.5 11.5 17.9 52.1 – 41.0 3.2 – 2.1 – 0.8 4.9 10.5
2021 1,994.7 20.4 297.7 37.7 14.9 1.9 7.8 13.4 19.9 161.5 212.6 8.1 5.0 2.9 8.2 12.2
2022 2,431.3 20.8 324.8 7.8 13.4 – 1.6 6.4 11.8 18.4 171.0 4.1 7.0 – 1.1 1.6 6.6 12.4
2018 H2 869.4 1.4 114.4 0.5 13.2 – 0.1 6.3 11.2 18.0 58.0 – 7.6 6.7 – 0.6 2.1 6.8 12.5
2019 H1 861.3 2.7 112.3 – 4.0 13.0 – 0.9 6.5 11.8 18.6 53.4 – 23.3 6.2 – 2.1 1.5 5.7 11.7
H2 903.7 2.4 121.3 4.8 13.4 0.3 6.6 11.8 20.0 52.0 – 11.4 5.8 – 0.9 0.8 6.1 12.5
2020 H1 744.5 – 14.4 78.2 – 34.1 10.5 – 3.0 4.8 9.9 16.7 7.9 – 88.0 1.1 – 5.3 – 2.1 3.5 8.8
H2 888.4 – 3.3 135.4 17.1 15.2 2.8 7.6 13.2 19.8 44.2 8.6 5.0 0.7 1.7 6.5 11.6
2021 H1 920.0 20.3 151.5 87.2 16.5 5.9 7.4 12.6 19.5 84.5 . 9.2 8.3 2.3 7.8 12.2
H2 1,075.6 20.4 146.4 8.1 13.6 – 1.6 7.9 13.2 20.8 77.0 73.1 7.2 2.2 2.9 7.7 13.4
2022 H1 1,149.7 23.5 161.0 4.8 14.0 – 2.5 6.1 11.5 18.4 84.9 – 1.6 7.4 – 1.9 1.6 6.4 11.8
H2 1,283.3 18.5 163.9 11.0 12.8 – 0.9 5.9 11.6 18.9 86.2 10.4 6.7 – 0.5 1.7 6.7 12.9
p 2023 H1 1,112.0 – 3.0 172.0 7.4 15.5 1.5 6.4 10.8 17.5 98.1 16.2 8.8 1.5 1.2 6.5 10.8
Groups with a focus on the production sector 5
2015 1,309.7 7.0 149.0 – 2.6 11.4 – 1.1 6.3 10.5 16.3 69.1 – 19.7 5.3 – 1.8 2.2 6.6 10.4
2016 1,295.9 – 0.8 161.9 6.3 12.5 0.8 6.5 10.6 16.0 84.8 4.2 6.5 0.3 2.8 6.3 10.5
2017 1,395.9 5.5 187.5 16.6 13.4 1.3 7.1 11.0 15.8 112.5 40.6 8.1 2.0 3.2 6.7 10.4
6 2018 1,367.7 1.0 175.7 – 1.5 12.9 – 0.3 6.9 10.7 16.0 100.7 – 7.1 7.4 – 0.6 2.8 6.9 11.4
2019 1,410.9 2.0 168.1 – 4.4 11.9 – 0.8 6.9 11.3 16.6 76.3 – 23.8 5.4 – 1.8 1.4 5.7 10.1
2020 1,285.2 – 9.4 143.6 – 8.6 11.2 0.1 5.7 10.6 16.5 29.1 – 48.1 2.3 – 2.3 – 0.7 4.3 9.8
2021 1,585.8 22.4 208.9 45.9 13.2 2.1 7.9 12.8 17.9 118.6 325.8 7.5 5.4 2.8 7.8 11.1
2022 1,957.4 21.7 222.9 4.7 11.4 – 1.8 6.9 11.3 16.4 117.3 – 3.9 6.0 – 1.6 1.8 6.6 10.7
2018 H2 695.4 2.1 83.1 0.7 12.0 – 0.2 6.2 11.1 16.2 42.1 – 8.7 6.1 – 0.7 2.0 6.4 11.4
2019 H1 689.9 2.4 83.3 – 8.8 12.1 – 1.5 7.1 10.9 16.1 41.9 – 26.8 6.1 – 2.4 1.8 6.0 9.5
H2 721.0 1.7 84.8 0.3 11.8 – 0.2 6.1 10.8 16.9 34.4 – 19.7 4.8 – 1.3 0.6 5.2 11.1
2020 H1 580.6 – 16.0 49.0 – 42.4 8.4 – 3.8 4.4 8.8 14.9 0.2 – 101.7 0.0 – 6.2 – 2.1 3.1 7.8
H2 704.6 – 3.0 94.6 25.4 13.4 3.4 7.0 12.1 18.6 28.9 19.6 4.1 1.1 0.3 6.0 10.4
2021 H1 731.9 24.0 111.2 126.9 15.2 6.9 8.2 12.6 18.6 66.7 . 9.1 9.3 2.9 7.9 12.1
H2 854.2 21.1 97.7 3.8 11.4 – 1.9 7.8 12.3 17.5 51.9 80.8 6.1 2.0 2.6 7.0 11.5
2022 H1 923.4 23.8 110.9 – 2.5 12.0 – 3.3 7.7 11.5 16.3 59.0 – 14.2 6.4 – 2.8 2.3 6.4 10.4
H2 1,035.8 19.9 112.2 13.1 10.8 – 0.7 5.9 10.8 16.7 58.4 9.6 5.6 – 0.5 1.3 6.5 11.4
p 2023 H1 894.9 – 2.8 129.0 16.6 14.4 2.4 7.1 11.7 16.3 76.7 30.5 8.6 2.2 2.1 6.7 10.7
Groups with a focus on the services sector
2015 324.1 6.1 46.9 4.0 14.5 – 0.3 5.9 11.1 22.1 22.3 – 3.8 6.9 – 0.7 1.3 6.7 13.9
2016 328.4 1.3 52.5 12.8 16.0 1.6 6.8 13.4 25.1 26.9 24.4 8.2 1.5 2.3 8.2 15.3
2017 323.4 3.5 55.9 8.3 17.3 0.8 6.8 11.5 23.0 29.4 11.4 9.1 0.6 2.1 7.2 15.1
6 2018 339.2 – 0.6 57.1 1.3 16.8 0.3 5.5 10.5 24.7 28.5 – 3.5 8.4 – 0.3 1.4 5.8 16.6
2019 353.7 4.8 65.4 15.2 18.5 1.7 6.9 13.7 24.5 29.2 2.8 8.3 – 0.2 2.4 6.2 16.2
2020 347.6 – 6.1 70.0 – 5.4 20.1 0.1 6.9 13.3 22.1 23.0 – 22.1 6.6 – 1.4 – 1.2 6.5 12.2
2021 408.9 13.0 88.8 21.6 21.7 1.6 7.6 15.0 24.0 42.8 79.7 10.5 3.9 3.0 9.2 15.6
2022 473.9 17.4 101.9 15.3 21.5 – 0.4 5.2 13.1 22.8 53.8 26.4 11.3 0.8 1.0 6.9 14.4
2018 H2 174.0 – 1.3 31.3 – 0.0 18.0 0.2 6.7 11.3 25.6 15.9 – 4.6 9.1 – 0.3 2.2 7.0 17.8
2019 H1 171.4 4.0 29.0 13.1 16.9 1.4 5.7 12.3 24.4 11.6 – 7.5 6.7 – 0.9 0.0 4.9 14.5
H2 182.7 5.5 36.5 16.9 20.0 1.9 7.1 15.1 24.4 17.7 10.9 9.7 0.5 1.8 8.2 16.3
2020 H1 163.9 – 8.1 29.2 – 9.4 17.8 – 0.3 5.6 10.8 21.2 7.7 – 36.4 4.7 – 2.1 – 2.2 4.3 10.9
H2 183.8 – 4.2 40.8 – 2.2 22.2 0.4 8.9 14.7 23.3 15.3 – 12.8 8.3 – 0.9 2.6 7.5 13.3
2021 H1 188.1 7.7 40.3 26.1 21.5 3.1 6.9 12.6 24.5 17.8 119.9 9.5 4.8 0.9 6.9 13.6
H2 221.4 17.9 48.7 18.2 22.0 0.1 9.4 16.5 24.7 25.1 59.1 11.3 3.0 3.8 9.5 17.7
2022 H1 226.3 22.0 50.1 25.3 22.2 0.6 4.6 11.6 20.9 25.9 46.4 11.5 1.9 – 0.5 6.3 13.5
H2 247.6 13.4 51.8 7.0 20.9 – 1.3 5.2 14.1 24.0 27.8 12.1 11.2 – 0.1 2.2 7.5 15.4
p 2023 H1 217.1 – 3.8 43.1 – 13.3 19.8 – 2.2 4.7 9.6 19.2 21.4 – 16.4 9.9 – 1.5 – 2.2 4.2 12.0
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-
cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Earnings before interest, taxes, de-
preciation and amortisation.  2 Quantile data are based on the groups' unweighted re-
turn on sales.  3 Annual figures do not always match the sum of the two half-year fig-ures. See Quality report on consolidated financial statement statistics, p. 3.  4 Adjusted
for substantial changes in the basis of consolidation of large groups and in the
reporting sample. See Quality report on consolidated financial statement statistics,
p. 6. 5 Including groups in agriculture and forestry.  6 From 2018 onwards: significant
changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with previous periods.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
75•
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
€ million
2023
Item 2020 2021 2022 Q1  Q2  Q3 September October  r November  p
I.Current Account +205,749 +352,144 –73,612 +30,428 +38,308 +96,894 +35,036 +28,418 +31,708
1.Goods
Receipts 2,176,527 2,501,971 2,955,780 736,262 721,977 698,846 239,323 257,682 261,543
Expenditure  1,843,734 2,224,666 3,034,821 690,654 667,767 631,234 214,479 225,584 223,481
Balance +332,793 +277,305 –79,040 +45,608 +54,210 +67,612 +24,844 +32,098 +38,062
2.Services
Receipts 883,923 1,035,941 1,263,669 296,527 321,735 340,035 112,987 112,366 112,317
Expenditure  891,717 928,525 1,113,422 280,607 279,143 292,348 97,196 100,708 99,738
Balance – 7,794 +107,416 +150,247 +15,920 +42,592 +47,687 +15,791 +11,658 +12,579
3.Primary income
Receipts 737,663 880,948 988,037 267,596 318,239 303,290 106,933 96,394 98,323
Expenditure  699,140 754,080 964,899 256,643 342,370 281,868 99,200 98,109 103,812
Balance +38,524 +126,868 +23,137 +10,954 –24,131 +21,422 + 7,733 – 1,715 – 5,490
4.Secondary income
Receipts 128,895 159,503 165,476 39,782 46,049 38,220 13,315 12,800 12,715
Expenditure  286,669 318,948 333,433 81,835 80,412 78,048 26,647 26,424 26,159
Balance –157,774 –159,445 –167,956 –42,053 –34,363 –39,827 –13,332 –13,623 –13,444
II.Capital account + 4,715 +50,738 +154,865 + 4,773 + 4,143 +10,793 + 8,344 + 3,044 + 3,506
III.Financial account  1 +204,085 +409,960 +83,338 +39,446 +49,758 +100,406 +46,023 +22,202 +70,988
1.Direct investment –172,841 +398,991 +301,336 +33,989 + 8,049 +10,519 +24,998 +16,509 – 3,262
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  –33,195 +341,878 –11,925 +50,520 –108,660 + 6,393 –10,538 –48,326 +20,704
By non-resident units of
the euro area  +139,646 –57,112 –313,261 +16,531 –116,709 – 4,126 –35,535 –64,835 +23,966
2.Portfolio investment +537,369 +307,455 –285,947 –96,404 +67,666 –25,988 –61,134 –12,952 +51,414
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  +692,274 +782,483 –228,423 +63,264 +205,702 +86,500 + 1,331 –19,763 +59,359
Equity and
investment fund shares +326,378 +362,157 –186,018 +26,950 +30,513 – 5,163 –18,791 –14,719 + 2,801
Short-term
debt securities  +125,603 +118,607 –110,943 –57,603 +88,356 +31,872 +16,182 + 2,191 +45,269
Long-term
debt securities  +240,293 +301,718 +68,538 +93,918 +86,833 +59,791 + 3,940 – 7,235 +11,289
By non-resident units of 
the euro area  +154,905 +475,028 +57,523 +159,669 +138,036 +112,489 +62,465 – 6,811 + 7,945
Equity and
investment fund shares +181,256 +640,342 +34,447 +23,659 +18,306 +28,465 + 1,328 – 5,577 +18,033
Short-term
debt securities  +116,258 +35,539 –66,465 – 2,738 – 3,783 +17,786 +22,307 –19,947 –21,409
Long-term
debt securities  –142,609 –200,853 +89,541 +138,748 +123,514 +66,238 +38,830 +18,713 +11,322
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options +19,509 +63,710 +72,070 +15,263 – 4,776 – 3,411 + 2,181 +17,101 + 1,896
4.Other investment –193,134 –490,567 –22,049 +105,232 –23,064 +121,441 +83,846 – 2,182 +19,431
Eurosystem –211,742 –443,810 +172,803 +169,914 +75,354 +55,538 – 2,578 +41,009 –12,842
General government –15,747 –80,434 –49,541 + 5,183 + 6,069 – 1,721 + 985 –20,191 + 3,064
MFIs  2 +24,491 –130,433 –282,831 – 4,019 –64,643 +39,307 +47,024 +10,777 +53,183
Enterprises and households + 9,863 +164,109 +137,520 –65,846 –39,843 +28,317 +38,414 –33,776 –23,975
5.Reserve assets +13,183 +130,371 +17,928 –18,633 + 1,883 – 2,155 – 3,868 + 3,728 + 1,508
IV.Net errors and omissions – 6,379 + 7,079 + 2,085 + 4,245 + 7,307 – 7,281 + 2,643 – 9,260 +35,774
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Increase: + / decrease: -.2 Excluding the Eurosystem.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
76•
XII. External sector
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Current Account Financial account  3
Goods 
Zeit Total Totalof which: 
Supplementary
trade items  1 ServicesPrimary
incomeSecondary
incomeBalance of
capital
account  2 Totalof which: 
Reserve
assetsErrors
and
omissions  4
2009 + 142,744 + 140,626 – 6,605 – 17,642 + 54,524 – 34,764 – 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 – 11,194
2010 + 147,298 + 160,829 – 6,209 – 25,255 + 51,306 – 39,582 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 – 55,760
2011 + 167,340 + 162,970 – 9,357 – 29,930 + 69,087 – 34,787 + 419 + 120,857 + 2,836 – 46,902
2012 + 195,712 + 199,531 – 11,388 – 30,774 + 65,658 – 38,703 – 413 + 151,417 + 1,297 – 43,882
2013 + 184,352 + 203,802 – 12,523 – 39,321 + 63,284 – 43,413 – 563 + 226,014 + 838 + 42,224
2014 + 211,477 + 219,629 – 14,296 – 25,303 + 58,646 – 41,495 + 3,255 + 230,931 – 2,564 + 16,200
2015 + 259,781 + 248,394 – 15,405 – 18,516 + 69,324 – 39,420 + 265 + 237,733 – 2,213 – 22,313
2016 + 270,200 + 252,409 – 19,921 – 20,987 + 77,258 – 38,480 + 2,451 + 258,906 + 1,686 – 13,744
2017 + 255,964 + 255,077 – 13,613 – 23,994 + 77,046 – 52,165 – 2,653 + 268,306 – 1,269 + 14,996
2018 + 267,609 + 221,983 – 22,985 – 15,806 + 112,389 – 50,958 + 914 + 242,889 + 392 – 25,634
2019 + 283,849 + 219,548 – 32,263 – 13,553 + 128,602 – 50,747 – 3,705 + 200,312 – 544 – 79,832
2020 + 240,239 + 191,031 – 8,907 + 7,418 + 96,014 – 54,224 – 9,120 + 191,481 – 51 – 39,638
2021 + 278,689 + 194,388 + 4,757 + 4,802 + 138,545 – 59,046 – 1,179 + 248,551 + 31,892 – 28,959
2022 + 170,937 + 120,791 + 9,999 – 31,036 + 150,017 – 68,835 – 18,644 + 227,707 + 4,426 + 75,414
2023 + 280,326 + 235,416 – 10,948 – 58,205 + 165,730 – 62,616 – 24,877 + 290,369 + 884 + 34,921
2021 Q1 + 77,373 + 57,527 + 679 + 5,095 + 32,650 – 17,899 – 834 + 72,025 + 385 – 4,514
Q2 + 67,702 + 48,292 + 868 + 7,141 + 21,166 – 8,897 – 2,336 + 87,467 + 58 + 22,101
Q3 + 65,695 + 49,316 + 145 – 5,830 + 37,736 – 15,527 + 1,985 + 16,702 + 31,199 – 50,977
Q4 + 67,919 + 39,252 + 3,064 – 1,604 + 46,994 – 16,723 + 7 + 72,358 + 250 + 4,432
2022 Q1 + 60,119 + 34,968 + 3,927 + 3,038 + 40,362 – 18,249 – 3,021 + 78,775 + 2,200 + 21,677
Q2 + 31,086 + 27,654 + 7,766 – 5,314 + 22,259 – 13,513 – 4,780 + 67,323 + 597 + 41,017
Q3 + 22,958 + 22,987 – 361 – 22,180 + 39,507 – 17,356 – 5,860 – 30,017 + 784 – 47,115
Q4 + 56,774 + 35,182 – 1,333 – 6,579 + 47,889 – 19,718 – 4,984 + 111,625 + 845 + 59,835
2023 Q1 + 69,937 + 55,177 – 1,396 – 6,692 + 41,057 – 19,605 – 11,325 + 99,813 + 224 + 41,200
Q2 + 58,912 + 55,857 – 983 – 14,337 + 26,742 – 9,349 – 4,047 + 51,855 + 1,096 – 3,011
Q3 + 69,554 + 62,010 – 1,556 – 24,854 + 46,482 – 14,083 – 3,535 + 55,215 – 790 – 10,804
Q4 + 81,922 + 62,372 – 7,014 – 12,321 + 51,449 – 19,579 – 5,970 + 83,487 + 355 + 7,535
2021 July + 21,623 + 18,516 – 472 – 1,848 + 10,917 – 5,962 – 487 + 1,156 + 102 – 19,980
Aug. + 18,381 + 12,984 + 897 – 3,024 + 13,086 – 4,665 + 532 + 17,522 + 31,254 – 1,391
Sep. + 25,690 + 17,816 – 280 – 958 + 13,733 – 4,901 + 1,939 – 1,977 – 158 – 29,606
Oct. + 18,128 + 15,135 + 1,038 – 4,720 + 13,280 – 5,567 + 506 + 13,955 + 261 – 4,680
Nov. + 22,113 + 14,414 + 759 + 138 + 13,670 – 6,108 – 1,007 + 33,852 + 963 + 12,746
Dec. + 27,678 + 9,704 + 1,266 + 2,978 + 20,043 – 5,048 + 508 + 24,551 – 974 – 3,634
2022 Jan. + 16,392 + 6,644 + 803 + 1,740 + 14,181 – 6,173 – 417 + 29,438 + 309 + 13,462
Feb. + 23,856 + 15,694 + 1,472 + 2,099 + 11,673 – 5,609 – 1,637 + 48,042 + 1,161 + 25,823
Mar. + 19,871 + 12,630 + 1,653 – 801 + 14,508 – 6,467 – 968 + 1,295 + 730 – 17,608
Apr. + 11,144 + 5,057 + 2,536 – 917 + 12,425 – 5,421 – 1,556 + 19,988 + 83 + 10,400
May + 3,390 + 10,859 + 4,323 – 1,959 – 3,881 – 1,628 – 2,724 + 893 + 161 + 227
June + 16,551 + 11,738 + 906 – 2,438 + 13,715 – 6,464 – 501 + 46,441 + 353 + 30,391
July + 8,854 + 8,855 + 382 – 6,089 + 13,001 – 6,912 – 2,321 – 23,333 – 484 – 29,866
Aug. + 1,581 + 3,017 – 567 – 9,555 + 14,077 – 5,957 – 1,261 + 16,672 + 81 + 16,352
Sep. + 12,523 + 11,116 – 176 – 6,536 + 12,429 – 4,486 – 2,277 – 23,355 + 1,187 – 33,601
Oct. + 9,648 + 7,306 – 34 – 5,287 + 13,076 – 5,447 – 2,212 + 44,969 + 672 + 37,533
Nov. + 20,246 + 15,140 + 731 – 2,077 + 13,661 – 6,479 – 2,129 + 466 + 425 – 17,650
Dec. + 26,881 + 12,736 – 2,030 + 785 + 21,152 – 7,792 – 643 + 66,191 – 252 + 39,953
2023 Jan. + 16,964 + 11,678 + 233 – 1,534 + 12,362 – 5,542 – 4,700 + 12,744 – 341 + 481
Feb. + 22,466 + 18,505 – 163 – 2,175 + 12,175 – 6,039 – 1,789 + 32,485 + 143 + 11,808
Mar. + 30,508 + 24,994 – 1,466 – 2,983 + 16,520 – 8,023 – 4,835 + 54,584 + 423 + 28,911
Apr. + 22,352 + 16,296 + 301 – 3,330 + 14,455 – 5,069 – 640 – 15,278 + 88 – 36,990
May + 8,169 + 15,803 + 281 – 6,134 – 1,421 – 79 – 2,309 + 11,923 + 45 + 6,062
June + 28,392 + 23,757 – 1,566 – 4,874 + 13,709 – 4,200 – 1,099 + 55,210 + 962 + 27,917
July + 18,704 + 19,175 – 2,709 – 8,304 + 13,294 – 5,460 – 4,341 – 20 – 118 – 14,383
Aug. + 22,830 + 20,345 + 1,567 – 10,346 + 17,385 – 4,554 – 686 + 32,989 – 107 + 10,846
Sep. + 28,020 + 22,491 – 414 – 6,205 + 15,803 – 4,069 + 1,492 + 22,245 – 566 – 7,267
Oct. + 19,989 + 21,683 – 596 – 9,469 + 13,987 – 6,213 – 4,019 + 15,584 + 858 – 385
Nov. + 30,528 + 24,166 – 3,235 – 2,861 + 15,522 – 6,300 – 4,224 + 31,170 + 65 + 4,865
p Dec. + 31,405 + 16,522 – 3,183 + 9 + 21,940 – 7,066 + 2,272 + 36,732 – 569 + 3,055
1 For example, warehouse transactions for the account of residents, deductions of
goods returned and deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for
processing.  2 Including net acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets.3 Net lending: + / net borrowing: -.  4 Statistical errors and omissions resulting from the
difference between the balance on the financial account and the balances on the
current account and the capital account.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
77•
XII. External sector
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
€ million
2023
Group of countries/country 
2021 2022 
2023 July Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov. Dec.
All countries  1 Exports 1,379,346 1,594,034 1,562,359 126,200 123,808 129,631 131,207 139,213 113,446
Imports 1,204,050 1,505,434 1,352,798 108,109 107,822 110,136 112,969 116,828 96,659
Balance +175,296 +88,600 +209,561 +18,091 +15,986 +19,495 +18,239 +22,385 +16,788
   I. European countries Exports 949,744 1,091,554 1,060,066 84,291 82,413 88,735 88,727 95,583 75,223
Imports 803,687 973,063 871,934 69,850 68,134 71,198 72,882 76,393 61,308
Balance +146,057 +118,492 +188,132 +14,441 +14,279 +17,537 +15,845 +19,190 +13,916
      1. EU Member States (27) Exports 751,322 878,642 847,349 67,386 65,695 71,379 70,671 75,354 59,627
Imports 638,064 737,668 709,856 57,273 55,805 58,584 59,607 62,112 49,724
Balance +113,259 +140,974 +137,492 +10,113 + 9,890 +12,795 +11,064 +13,242 + 9,903
          Euro area (20)       Exports 525,992 617,068 595,485 47,818 44,864 49,716 49,497 52,793 42,033
          countries Imports 440,248 506,865 473,263 38,418 37,284 38,608 39,626 40,907 33,253
Balance +85,744 +110,203 +122,222 + 9,400 + 7,580 +11,108 + 9,872 +11,885 + 8,780
          of which:
               Austria Exports 72,385 90,270 79,013 6,361 6,330 6,617 6,405 6,813 5,443
  Imports 47,492 58,137 53,835 4,371 4,163 4,452 4,421 4,808 3,720
Balance +24,893 +32,134 +25,178 + 1,990 + 2,167 + 2,165 + 1,984 + 2,004 + 1,723
               Belgium and Exports 58,080 70,933 66,964 5,313 5,474 5,501 5,512 5,663 4,723
               Luxembourg Imports 55,726 67,071 56,210 4,307 5,145 4,679 4,734 4,893 3,744
Balance + 2,354 + 3,861 +10,754 + 1,006 + 329 + 822 + 778 + 769 + 979
               France Exports 102,741 118,168 116,762 9,383 8,377 9,906 9,865 10,334 8,581
  Imports 61,921 69,969 68,857 5,547 5,058 5,710 5,656 6,086 5,150
Balance +40,820 +48,198 +47,905 + 3,835 + 3,319 + 4,196 + 4,209 + 4,247 + 3,431
               Italy Exports 75,526 89,191 84,658 6,899 5,341 7,139 7,060 7,718 5,811
  Imports 65,389 73,177 70,986 6,289 5,071 5,769 6,144 6,198 4,852
Balance +10,137 +16,014 +13,672 + 610 + 271 + 1,370 + 916 + 1,520 + 960
               Netherlands Exports 101,050 112,261 111,510 8,912 8,628 9,110 9,185 9,817 8,110
  Imports 105,113 114,998 103,279 8,452 8,164 8,155 8,358 8,440 7,859
Balance – 4,063 – 2,737 + 8,230 + 461 + 463 + 955 + 827 + 1,377 + 251
               Spain  Exports 43,932 49,935 53,141 4,510 3,727 4,526 4,588 5,042 3,633
  Imports 34,180 37,756 38,611 3,101 2,948 2,926 2,923 3,487 2,951
Balance + 9,752 +12,178 +14,530 + 1,409 + 779 + 1,601 + 1,664 + 1,555 + 683
          Other EU Member  Exports 225,331 261,574 251,864 19,568 20,831 21,663 21,173 22,561 17,594
          States  Imports 197,815 230,803 236,594 18,855 18,520 19,976 19,981 21,204 16,471
Balance +27,515 +30,772 +15,270 + 713 + 2,310 + 1,687 + 1,192 + 1,357 + 1,123
      2. Other European Exports 198,421 212,912 212,717 16,905 16,718 17,356 18,056 20,229 15,596
          countries Imports 165,623 235,395 162,078 12,577 12,330 12,614 13,275 14,281 11,584
Balance +32,798 –22,483 +50,639 + 4,328 + 4,389 + 4,742 + 4,781 + 5,947 + 4,013
          of which:
               Switzerland Exports 60,638 70,611 66,565 5,301 5,406 5,525 5,490 6,094 4,628
  Imports 49,247 55,723 51,741 4,000 4,010 4,466 4,310 5,108 3,647
Balance +11,391 +14,888 +14,823 + 1,301 + 1,395 + 1,059 + 1,180 + 986 + 982
               United Kingdom Exports 65,002 73,764 78,323 6,248 5,793 6,481 6,877 8,063 6,049
  Imports 32,245 40,314 36,785 2,906 2,870 3,224 2,813 3,058 2,468
Balance +32,757 +33,449 +41,537 + 3,342 + 2,923 + 3,257 + 4,064 + 5,005 + 3,581
   II. Non-European  Exports 427,430 497,428 497,461 41,504 40,909 40,400 41,985 43,239 37,889
       countries Imports 399,604 531,409 479,540 38,137 39,585 38,808 39,944 40,258 35,208
Balance +27,827 –33,982 +17,921 + 3,367 + 1,324 + 1,592 + 2,040 + 2,981 + 2,681
       1. Africa Exports 23,068 26,462 28,667 2,238 2,317 2,271 2,155 2,274 2,616
Imports 26,241 34,213 32,513 2,233 2,360 2,646 2,803 2,664 2,534
Balance – 3,173 – 7,751 – 3,846 + 4– 43 – 374 – 648 – 390 + 82
       2. America Exports 167,735 210,652 216,530 18,482 18,064 17,992 19,151 19,174 15,837
  Imports 101,525 131,979 130,090 10,577 10,794 10,113 10,905 11,368 10,568
Balance +66,210 +78,673 +86,440 + 7,904 + 7,270 + 7,879 + 8,246 + 7,807 + 5,269
           of which:
               United States  Exports 121,980 156,208 157,944 13,612 13,066 13,232 14,328 14,141 11,411
  Imports 72,316 93,338 94,406 7,547 7,830 7,575 7,946 8,335 7,668
Balance +49,664 +62,871 +63,538 + 6,064 + 5,236 + 5,656 + 6,381 + 5,806 + 3,743
       3. Asia Exports 224,897 246,289 238,543 19,648 19,497 19,250 19,605 20,541 18,310
  Imports 267,604 357,702 310,781 24,784 25,956 25,665 25,821 25,876 21,599
Balance –42,707 –111,413 –72,238 – 5,135 – 6,460 – 6,415 – 6,216 – 5,336 – 3,289
           of which:
               Middle East  Exports 26,090 29,648 32,024 2,513 2,610 2,855 2,792 3,015 2,666
  Imports 7,509 13,304 15,831 1,104 1,362 1,448 1,067 1,005 800
Balance +18,582 +16,344 +16,194 + 1,409 + 1,248 + 1,407 + 1,725 + 2,011 + 1,866
               Japan  Exports 18,245 20,511 20,235 1,756 1,571 1,635 1,737 1,669 1,528
Imports 23,477 25,413 25,537 2,010 2,117 2,256 2,177 2,073 1,763
Balance – 5,232 – 4,902 – 5,302 – 254 – 546 – 621 – 440 – 404 – 235
               People's Republic  Exports 103,564 106,762 97,320 8,272 8,222 7,578 7,904 8,545 7,248
               of China  2 Imports 142,964 192,830 155,737 12,370 13,076 12,440 13,269 13,818 11,299
Balance –39,400 –86,068 –58,417 – 4,098 – 4,853 – 4,862 – 5,365 – 5,273 – 4,051
               New industrial countries Exports 55,295 63,344 60,896 4,863 4,756 5,014 4,724 5,125 4,762
               and emerging markets  Imports 55,441 71,012 66,025 5,266 5,276 5,476 5,328 5,169 4,471
               of Asia  3 Balance – 146 – 7,668 – 5,129 – 403 – 520 – 463 – 604 – 43 + 291
       4. Oceania and Exports 11,731 14,024 13,722 1,136 1,031 887 1,074 1,249 1,127
           polar regions Imports 4,233 7,515 6,156 543 475 385 415 349 507
Balance + 7,497 + 6,510 + 7,565 + 594 + 556 + 502 + 659 + 900 + 620
* Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, Imports
(c.i.f.) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to
the current position. Euro area incl. Croatia.  1 Including fuel and other supplies forships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region.  2 Excluding Hong Kong.
3 Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea,
Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
78•
XII. External sector
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Services  Primary income
of which: 
Zeit Total Transport Travel  1Financial
servicesCharges for
the use of
intellectual
propertyTelecommuni-
cations-, 
computer and
information
servicesOther
business
servicesGouvernment
goods and
services  2Compensation
of employeesInvestment
incomeOther
primary
income  3
2019 – 13,553 + 3,607 – 45,947 + 10,755 + 18,368 – 9,763 – 2,948 + 3,489 + 492 +128,990 – 880
2020 + 7,418 – 5,302 – 14,678 + 10,051 + 17,665 – 7,770 – 4,426 + 3,368 + 3,196 + 94,205 – 1,387
2021 + 4,802 – 6,635 – 24,323 + 8,306 + 32,834 – 8,466 – 9,361 + 3,531 + 2,664 +137,881 – 1,999
2022 – 31,036 – 8,643 – 55,244 + 9,464 + 31,406 – 11,241 – 10,085 + 4,078 + 1,993 +152,926 – 4,902
2023 – 58,205 – 9,969 – 62,123 + 8,192 + 20,936 – 11,344 – 14,992 + 3,280 + 2,501 +166,959 – 3,730
2022 Q2 – 5,314 – 187 – 13,125 + 2,270 + 7,307 – 2,182 – 2,722 + 1,062 + 425 + 25,841 – 4,007
Q3 – 22,180 – 3,727 – 22,632 + 2,159 + 5,874 – 3,429 – 3,712 + 1,100 – 82 + 41,295 – 1,705
Q4 – 6,579 – 1,880 – 13,454 + 3,039 + 6,695 – 1,926 – 2,131 + 853 + 362 + 45,264 + 2,263
2023 Q1 – 6,692 – 2,788 – 8,001 + 1,777 + 5,263 – 3,682 – 3,001 + 1,051 + 1,224 + 41,509 – 1,676
Q2 – 14,337 – 1,754 – 14,337 + 2,074 + 4,748 – 2,553 – 4,963 + 776 + 393 + 29,351 – 3,002
Q3 – 24,854 – 2,847 – 23,750 + 2,110 + 4,893 – 3,454 – 4,695 + 815 + 49 + 47,836 – 1,403
Q4 – 12,321 – 2,580 – 16,036 + 2,231 + 6,033 – 1,654 – 2,333 + 638 + 836 + 48,263 + 2,351
2023 Feb. – 2,175 – 1,101 – 2,334 + 542 + 946 – 910 – 398 + 351 + 409 + 12,290 – 524
Mar. – 2,983 – 1,050 – 3,341 + 463 + 2,388 – 1,338 – 1,301 + 309 + 366 + 16,661 – 507
Apr. – 3,330 – 452 – 3,406 + 553 + 2,362 – 1,519 – 1,599 + 227 + 104 + 14,820 – 469
May – 6,134 – 707 – 5,027 + 677 + 1,127 – 1,234 – 1,685 + 220 + 111 – 666 – 867
June – 4,874 – 595 – 5,904 + 843 + 1,259 + 199 – 1,679 + 328 + 178 + 15,197 – 1,666
July – 8,304 – 624 – 6,694 + 624 + 1,031 – 1,588 – 1,762 + 204 – 57 + 13,783 – 433
Aug. – 10,346 – 1,075 – 8,867 + 804 + 789 – 1,111 – 1,753 + 301 – 17 + 17,905 – 503
Sep. – 6,205 – 1,147 – 8,189 + 682 + 3,072 – 755 – 1,180 + 309 + 122 + 16,148 – 467
Oct. – 9,469 – 1,116 – 9,630 + 388 + 2,236 – 1,347 – 746 + 332 + 249 + 14,241 – 503
Nov. – 2,861 – 741 – 3,790 + 779 + 2,171 – 431 – 1,426 + 152 + 241 + 15,607 – 325
p Dec. + 9 – 723 – 2,615 + 1,065 + 1,627 + 123 – 161 + 155 + 345 + 18,415 + 3,180
1 Since 2001 the sample results of a household survey have been used on the
expenditure side.  2 Domestic public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on
services, not included elsewhere; including the receipts from foreign military bases.3 Includes, inter alia, taxes on leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU as
well as subsidies received from the EU.
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Secondary income Capital account
General government All sectors excluding general government  2
of which:  of which: 
Zeit Total TotalCurrent
international
cooperation  1Current
taxes on
income, wealth,
etc. TotalPersonal transfers
between
resident and
non-resident
households  3of which: 
Workers’
remittances TotalNon-produced
non-financial
assetsCapital
transfers
2019 – 50,747 – 30,251 – 11,473 + 11,591 – 20,496 .– 5,431 – 3,705 – 298 – 3,407
2020 – 54,224 – 36,074 – 13,498 + 10,767 – 18,150 .– 5,908 – 9,120 – 3,418 – 5,702
2021 – 59,046 – 36,974 – 11,303 + 11,888 – 22,072 .– 6,170 – 1,179 – 392 – 787
2022 – 68,835 – 41,923 – 17,878 + 14,041 – 26,913 .– 7,149 – 18,644 – 14,397 – 4,247
2023 – 62,616 – 35,772 – 13,550 + 14,198 – 26,844 .– 6,805 – 24,877 – 19,062 – 5,815
2022 Q2 – 13,513 – 5,957 – 3,247 + 7,339 – 7,556 .– 1,810 – 4,780 – 3,988 – 792
Q3 – 17,356 – 11,401 – 3,727 + 2,138 – 5,955 .– 1,810 – 5,860 – 4,533 – 1,326
Q4 – 19,718 – 13,604 – 7,751 + 2,086 – 6,113 .– 1,810 – 4,984 – 3,011 – 1,973
2023 Q1 – 19,605 – 10,860 – 3,352 + 2,580 – 8,744 .– 1,731 – 11,325 – 10,563 – 762
Q2 – 9,349 – 3,481 – 1,697 + 7,492 – 5,868 .– 1,691 – 4,047 – 3,083 – 964
Q3 – 14,083 – 8,464 – 2,184 + 2,039 – 5,620 .– 1,691 – 3,535 – 2,265 – 1,270
Q4 – 19,579 – 12,968 – 6,317 + 2,087 – 6,611 .– 1,691 – 5,970 – 3,151 – 2,819
2023 Feb. – 6,039 – 3,879 – 923 + 991 – 2,161 – 564 – 564 – 1,789 – 1,776 – 13
Mar. – 8,023 – 3,188 – 519 + 935 – 4,835 .– 564 – 4,835 – 4,618 – 217
Apr. – 5,069 – 3,264 – 1,060 + 1,070 – 1,806 .– 564 – 640 – 182 – 458
May – 79 + 1,974 – 254 + 5,166 – 2,053 .– 564 – 2,309 – 2,114 – 195
June – 4,200 – 2,191 – 383 + 1,256 – 2,010 .– 564 – 1,099 – 787 – 312
July – 5,460 – 3,498 – 911 + 536 – 1,962 .– 564 – 4,341 – 3,670 – 671
Aug. – 4,554 – 2,818 – 823 + 381 – 1,736 – 565 – 564 – 686 – 434 – 252
Sep. – 4,069 – 2,147 – 451 + 1,122 – 1,922 .– 564 + 1,492 + 1,839 – 347
Oct. – 6,213 – 4,194 – 1,398 + 391 – 2,019 .– 560 – 4,019 – 3,426 – 593
Nov. – 6,300 – 4,248 – 1,480 + 445 – 2,052 – 562 – 560 – 4,224 – 3,416 – 808
p Dec. – 7,066 – 4,526 – 3,438 + 1,251 – 2,540 – 573 – 571 + 2,272 + 3,691 – 1,418
1 Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international
cooperation and other current transfers.  2 Includes insurance premiums and claims(excluding life insurance policies).  3 Transfers between resident and non-resident
households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
79•
XII. External sector
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany (net)
€ million
2023
Item 2021 2022 2023 Q2 Q3 Q4 October November December  p
I.Net domestic investment abroad
 (increase: +) +819,754 +328,088 +305,312 +26,252 +45,811 +103,406 +84,778 +64,375 –45,747
1.Direct investment +180,852 +169,006 +115,952 +34,896 +17,651 +35,517 + 9,121 +16,662 + 9,734
Equity +121,136 +114,061 +84,838 +23,725 +21,222 +16,862 + 2,200 + 9,871 + 4,791
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 +59,185 +69,943 +60,734 +14,343 +19,016 +10,894 + 3,547 + 5,706 + 1,641
Debt instruments +59,716 +54,945 +31,115 +11,172 – 3,571 +18,655 + 6,920 + 6,792 + 4,943
2.Portfolio investment +174,958 +16,697 +151,805 +49,343 + 4,599 +18,940 – 1,647 +12,859 + 7,729
Shares  2 +46,753 –16,698 – 5,928 – 4,568 – 6,069 + 637 – 210 – 226 + 1,073
Investment fund shares  3 +116,401 +33,614 +27,358 + 4,737 + 8,982 + 2,740 – 210 + 3,493 – 543
Short-term  4
debt securities – 107 +12,340 +12,882 + 2,892 – 710 + 3,059 + 1,473 + 1,008 + 578
Long-term   5
debt securities +11,912 –12,559 +117,493 +46,281 + 2,395 +12,504 – 2,700 + 8,585 + 6,620
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options  6 +60,178 +42,677 +43,759 +11,251 +12,599 – 337 + 5,141 – 1,603 – 3,875
4.Other investment  7 +371,874 +95,282 – 7,089 –70,335 +11,753 +48,931 +71,305 +36,392 –58,767
MFIs  8 +112,903 +59,476 +42,568 –23,037 +20,168 –20,361 +14,581 – 813 –34,129
Short-term +99,380 +34,961 +16,920 –18,346 + 2,381 –35,574 + 7,749 – 3,679 –39,644
Long-term +13,204 +24,474 +25,585 – 4,705 +17,766 +15,215 + 6,826 + 2,909 + 5,480
Enterprises and
households  9 +143,700 +46,596 +114,220 +52,932 +16,145 +12,111 +46,521 +35,424 –69,834
Short-term +113,230 +23,769 +98,999 +48,375 +13,065 + 8,874 +45,674 +34,224 –71,025
Long-term –13,944 – 7,625 + 874 + 563 + 950 – 1,232 – 517 + 70 – 784
General government – 8,123 –24,958 + 8,463 – 2,659 – 1,719 + 3,397 – 230 – 7+ 3,634
Short-term – 7,256 –23,451 + 3,929 – 1,897 – 1,571 + 4,112 – 179 + 350 + 3,941
Long-term – 2,327 – 2,883 + 1,995 – 1,000 – 627 – 715 – 51 – 357 – 307
Bundesbank +123,394 +14,167 –172,339 –97,571 –22,840 +53,785 +10,434 + 1,788 +41,563
5.Reserve assets +31,892 + 4,426 + 884 + 1,096 – 790 + 355 + 858 + 65 – 569
II.Net foreign investment in the
reporting country (increase: +) +571,203 +100,381 +14,942 –25,603 – 9,404 +19,919 +69,193 +33,205 –82,480
1.Direct investment +80,483 +43,725 +21,899 +21,404 – 5,333 +16,038 + 9,156 + 974 + 5,908
Equity +41,374 +14,811 +26,076 + 3,229 – 1,706 +11,371 + 2,026 + 6,776 + 2,569
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 + 7,659 + 7,123 + 3,925 – 4,384 + 1,524 + 810 + 214 + 634 – 38
Debt instruments +39,109 +28,914 – 4,177 +18,174 – 3,627 + 4,666 + 7,130 – 5,802 + 3,339
2.Portfolio investment –28,581 – 7,600 +143,963 +32,870 +58,974 – 1,063 –10,111 +18,872 – 9,825
Shares  2 + 2,101 – 4,695 –11,239 – 5,005 – 1,359 – 7– 2,683 + 1,079 + 1,598
Investment fund shares  3 – 8,433 – 3,235 – 1,953 – 1,061 – 1,592 – 232 + 109 – 1,102 + 762
Short-term  4
debt securities +29,313 –37,218 + 3,439 + 9,964 – 2,040 – 6,036 –16,035 + 5,259 + 4,740
Long-term   5
debt securities –51,563 +37,548 +153,717 +28,973 +63,964 + 5,211 + 8,500 +13,636 –16,925
3.Other investment  7 +519,301 +64,255 –150,920 –79,877 –63,045 + 4,945 +70,148 +13,359 –78,563
MFIs  8 +161,287 +152,946 –54,974 –33,858 –35,890 –93,581 +36,838 –21,321 –109,098
Short-term +115,265 +160,854 –87,998 –37,871 –50,804 –87,829 +35,590 –22,586 –100,833
Long-term +46,044 – 7,910 +33,022 + 4,015 +14,912 – 5,753 + 1,247 + 1,265 – 8,265
Enterprises and
households  9 +135,961 + 6,958 +42,491 +26,516 –24,784 +35,708 +55,006 +31,750 –51,047
Short-term +99,877 – 9,271 +27,352 +20,334 –26,261 +33,990 +54,399 +29,378 –49,786
Long-term +12,382 + 8,907 + 9,613 + 4,758 + 112 + 246 + 137 + 1,883 – 1,775
General government – 4,742 – 4,931 – 188 + 143 + 2,890 – 4,295 + 2,892 – 82 – 7,105
Short-term – 2,134 – 2,478 + 420 + 143 + 3,157 – 4,564 + 2,907 – 315 – 7,155
Long-term – 2,605 – 2,451 – 417 + 0– 77 + 268 – 15 + 233 + 51
Bundesbank +226,796 –90,717 –138,249 –72,678 – 5,260 +67,112 –24,587 + 3,012 +88,686
III.Net financial account 
(net lending: +/net borrowing: -) +248,551 +227,707 +290,369 +51,855 +55,215 +83,487 +15,584 +31,170 +36,732
1 Estimated on the basis of the figures on the level of direct investment stocks abroad
and in the Federal Republic of Germany (see Statistical series, direct investment
statistics).  2 Including participation certificates.  3 Including reinvestment of earnings.
4 Short-term: original maturity up to one year.  5 Up to and including 2012 without
accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited.6 Balance of transactions arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as
employee stock options.  7 Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency
and deposits.  8 Excluding Bundesbank.  9 Includes the following sectors: financial
corporations (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financial
corporations, households and non-profit institutions serving households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
80•
XII. External sector
7. External position of the Bundesbank *
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
End of
reporting
period Total TotalGold
and gold
receivablesSpecial
drawing
rightsReserve
position in
the IMFCurrency,
deposits and
securities Totalof which: 
Clearing
accounts
within the
ESCB  1Portfolio
investment  2External
liabilities  3 4Net
external
position  5
6 1999 Jan. 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 – – 9,628 85,688
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 – 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,891
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 – 30,308
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,923
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 – 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,454
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,932
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,003
2013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,921
2016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,723 397,727
2017 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,527 474,318
2018 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 770,519 439,462
2019 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 663,320 497,651
2020 1,429,236 219,127 166,904 14,014 8,143 30,066 1,152,757 1,136,002 57,353 781,339 647,898
2021 1,592,822 261,387 173,821 46,491 8,426 32,649 1,276,150 1,260,673 55,285 1,009,488 583,334
2022 1,617,056 276,488 184,036 48,567 9,480 34,404 1,290,317 1,269,076 50,251 919,441 697,614
2023 1,455,788 292,259 201,335 48,766 8,782 33,376 1,117,978 1,093,371 45,550 779,844 675,943
2021 Aug. 1,360,722 250,742 165,757 45,091 8,174 31,720 1,053,653 1,037,259 56,327 699,773 660,949
Sep. 1,431,909 246,908 160,943 45,606 8,267 32,092 1,130,558 1,115,126 54,443 746,128 685,781
Oct. 1,388,160 250,340 164,602 45,719 8,449 31,570 1,083,141 1,066,604 54,678 735,595 652,564
Nov. 1,456,861 258,815 170,460 46,375 8,405 33,575 1,142,719 1,127,545 55,327 773,217 683,644
Dec. 1,592,822 261,387 173,821 46,491 8,426 32,649 1,276,150 1,260,673 55,285 1,009,488 583,334
2022 Jan. 1,479,694 261,965 173,362 46,931 8,504 33,168 1,163,561 1,149,868 54,168 807,889 671,805
Feb. 1,491,552 273,726 184,255 46,854 8,711 33,905 1,164,098 1,149,722 53,729 774,786 716,766
Mar. 1,516,744 277,782 187,779 47,375 8,663 33,965 1,184,501 1,169,952 54,462 808,690 708,055
Apr. 1,491,558 288,953 196,274 48,617 8,799 35,263 1,148,681 1,135,400 53,923 790,221 701,337
May 1,505,419 278,174 186,481 48,031 8,681 34,980 1,173,376 1,159,716 53,869 805,179 700,240
June 1,566,099 281,157 187,573 48,712 8,948 35,923 1,232,176 1,216,530 52,767 826,280 739,819
July 1,514,570 280,910 185,950 49,465 9,086 36,409 1,179,431 1,166,155 54,229 810,881 703,689
Aug. 1,590,572 280,160 184,794 49,614 9,300 36,451 1,258,187 1,245,014 52,225 842,576 747,996
Sep. 1,613,008 281,258 184,022 50,287 9,358 37,592 1,281,266 1,266,647 50,483 829,129 783,879
Oct. 1,569,272 274,421 178,101 49,675 9,527 37,119 1,243,873 1,230,005 50,977 811,035 758,237
Nov. 1,577,175 277,458 183,052 49,168 9,315 35,923 1,248,088 1,233,980 51,629 810,314 766,861
Dec. 1,617,056 276,488 184,036 48,567 9,480 34,404 1,290,317 1,269,076 50,251 919,441 697,614
2023 Jan. 1,508,507 281,692 190,062 48,256 9,437 33,938 1,176,042 1,162,354 50,772 793,716 714,791
Feb. 1,455,724 276,016 183,755 48,582 9,480 34,199 1,130,353 1,114,888 49,356 743,006 712,718
Mar. 1,522,539 288,131 196,405 48,039 9,373 34,314 1,184,604 1,170,620 49,804 791,478 731,061
Apr. 1,431,180 285,667 194,679 47,642 9,297 34,049 1,096,324 1,081,284 49,189 726,986 704,194
May 1,435,049 290,368 197,915 48,658 9,379 34,416 1,095,750 1,081,900 48,931 701,467 733,582
June 1,416,292 280,820 188,991 48,618 9,292 33,919 1,087,034 1,068,747 48,438 718,324 697,969
July 1,399,374 282,438 191,458 48,368 9,184 33,429 1,068,875 1,052,218 48,061 689,447 709,927
Aug. 1,406,665 284,364 192,914 48,979 9,218 33,253 1,074,575 1,056,420 47,725 687,342 719,322
Sep. 1,393,337 282,490 190,232 49,647 9,278 33,333 1,064,193 1,048,059 46,654 713,662 679,675
Oct. 1,415,403 295,288 202,630 49,531 9,256 33,871 1,074,627 1,058,985 45,488 688,966 726,437
Nov. 1,414,241 292,718 201,195 48,939 8,958 33,627 1,076,415 1,060,074 45,107 691,309 722,932
Dec. 1,455,788 292,259 201,335 48,766 8,782 33,376 1,117,978 1,093,371 45,550 779,844 675,943
2024 Jan. 1,397,172 294,402 202,641 49,412 8,921 33,428 1,058,508 1,041,902 44,261 668,557 728,615
* Assets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to
December 2000 the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revaluations,
at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the basis of
cumulative transaction values. From January 2001 all end-of-month levels are valued at
market prices.  1 Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (acc. to the respective country
designation), since November 2000 also balances with non-euro area central bankswithin the ESCB.  2 Mainly long-term debt securities from issuers within the euro area.
3 Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad.  4 See Deutsche Bundesbank,
Monthly Report, October 2014, p. 22.  5 Difference between External assets and
External liabilities.  6 Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January
1999.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
81•
XII. External sector
8. External positions of enterprises *
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities to non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
End of
reporting
period TotalBalances
with
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
grantedAdvance
payments
effected TotalLoans
from
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
usedAdvance
payments
received
Rest of the world
2020 1,030,962 244,325 786,637 546,252 240,385 213,568 26,816 1,419,220 172,112 1,247,108 1,028,217 218,891 130,165 88,726
2021 1,163,639 256,764 906,875 616,964 289,911 261,752 28,159 1,576,549 215,064 1,361,485 1,105,049 256,436 159,446 96,990
2022 1,232,675 251,857 980,818 661,948 318,870 289,264 29,606 1,607,074 174,307 1,432,767 1,139,934 292,833 189,258 103,576
2023 1,359,181 357,997 1,001,184 688,702 312,482 281,494 30,988 1,654,743 214,458 1,440,285 1,154,059 286,226 179,792 106,434
2023 July 1,325,269 357,212 968,057 667,962 300,095 268,536 31,560 1,626,265 202,796 1,423,469 1,150,603 272,866 165,200 107,666
Aug. 1,312,101 353,215 958,886 667,907 290,980 259,478 31,501 1,630,134 206,965 1,423,169 1,157,253 265,916 157,918 107,998
Sep. 1,341,858 358,536 983,323 681,810 301,513 269,903 31,610 1,617,040 192,423 1,424,617 1,149,887 274,730 168,314 106,416
Oct. 1,395,509 405,220 990,289 681,988 308,302 277,468 30,834 1,681,900 221,614 1,460,286 1,180,866 279,420 172,897 106,522
Nov. 1,428,969 424,573 1,004,396 688,210 316,186 285,002 31,184 1,704,956 247,545 1,457,410 1,173,581 283,829 176,516 107,313
p Dec. 1,359,181 357,997 1,001,184 688,702 312,482 281,494 30,988 1,654,743 214,458 1,440,285 1,154,059 286,226 179,792 106,434
EU Member States (27 excl. GB)
2020 612,885 185,565 427,320 333,594 93,725 80,717 13,008 899,482 97,582 801,899 712,252 89,647 61,761 27,886
2021 660,557 194,046 466,511 358,320 108,191 95,340 12,851 988,142 151,193 836,949 733,188 103,761 74,174 29,587
2022 703,663 192,412 511,251 387,897 123,354 109,914 13,440 991,655 125,880 865,775 750,939 114,836 82,671 32,165
2023 816,276 284,817 531,459 410,769 120,690 106,262 14,428 1,014,822 139,380 875,442 759,104 116,338 83,290 33,048
2023 July 807,953 290,841 517,111 396,243 120,869 106,293 14,576 997,716 118,205 879,511 767,757 111,754 79,410 32,344
Aug. 799,774 286,857 512,916 395,782 117,135 102,618 14,517 997,918 122,139 875,779 768,727 107,052 74,940 32,112
Sep. 814,429 289,623 524,805 404,137 120,669 106,068 14,601 1,003,027 130,574 872,452 759,188 113,265 80,760 32,505
Oct. 863,004 331,387 531,617 407,738 123,878 109,443 14,435 1,027,403 132,009 895,394 779,711 115,683 82,927 32,756
Nov. 877,250 346,800 530,450 403,352 127,097 112,556 14,542 1,015,245 139,305 875,939 758,399 117,540 84,490 33,050
p Dec. 816,276 284,817 531,459 410,769 120,690 106,262 14,428 1,014,822 139,380 875,442 759,104 116,338 83,290 33,048
Extra-EU Member States (27 incl. GB)
2020 418,077 58,760 359,317 212,658 146,659 132,851 13,808 519,738 74,530 445,208 315,965 129,244 68,404 60,840
2021 503,082 62,718 440,364 258,644 181,720 166,411 15,309 588,407 63,871 524,536 371,861 152,675 85,271 67,403
2022 529,012 59,445 469,567 274,050 195,517 179,351 16,166 615,419 48,427 566,992 388,995 177,997 106,587 71,410
2023 542,904 73,180 469,725 277,933 191,792 175,232 16,560 639,921 75,078 564,843 394,955 169,888 96,501 73,386
2023 July 517,316 66,370 450,946 271,720 179,226 162,242 16,984 628,549 84,591 543,958 382,846 161,112 85,790 75,322
Aug. 512,327 66,357 445,970 272,125 173,845 156,860 16,985 632,216 84,826 547,390 388,526 158,864 82,978 75,886
Sep. 527,429 68,912 458,517 277,673 180,844 163,834 17,010 614,013 61,848 552,165 390,699 161,465 87,554 73,911
Oct. 532,505 73,833 458,673 274,249 184,423 168,024 16,399 654,496 89,604 564,892 401,155 163,737 89,970 73,766
Nov. 551,720 77,773 473,946 284,857 189,089 172,447 16,643 689,711 108,240 581,471 415,182 166,289 92,026 74,263
p Dec. 542,904 73,180 469,725 277,933 191,792 175,232 16,560 639,921 75,078 564,843 394,955 169,888 96,501 73,386
Euro area (20)
2020 526,584 164,691 361,893 288,485 73,408 61,662 11,746 812,136 75,869 736,267 666,749 69,518 47,547 21,971
2021 555,081 172,032 383,050 297,861 85,189 73,511 11,678 904,888 129,783 775,105 693,366 81,739 58,280 23,459
2022 597,491 173,395 424,096 328,761 95,336 83,244 12,092 903,757 105,435 798,322 709,668 88,654 63,579 25,075
2023 713,257 266,931 446,326 352,927 93,399 80,382 13,016 921,774 119,987 801,787 712,302 89,485 64,843 24,642
2023 July 705,172 275,142 430,030 335,723 94,306 81,133 13,173 910,691 100,225 810,466 725,283 85,183 60,654 24,529
Aug. 697,670 270,789 426,881 335,841 91,040 77,968 13,072 911,291 103,710 807,580 726,079 81,501 57,115 24,386
Sep. 709,383 271,823 437,560 344,312 93,248 80,095 13,153 910,853 109,897 800,956 714,940 86,016 61,442 24,575
Oct. 758,513 314,118 444,395 348,724 95,671 82,732 12,939 935,092 112,036 823,056 734,987 88,069 63,357 24,712
Nov. 773,209 330,217 442,991 344,235 98,756 85,690 13,067 917,978 116,492 801,486 712,701 88,785 63,979 24,806
p Dec. 713,257 266,931 446,326 352,927 93,399 80,382 13,016 921,774 119,987 801,787 712,302 89,485 64,843 24,642
Extra-Euro area (20)
2020 504,378 79,634 424,743 257,766 166,977 151,907 15,070 607,084 96,243 510,840 361,467 149,373 82,618 66,755
2021 608,558 84,732 523,826 319,103 204,723 188,241 16,481 671,661 85,281 586,380 411,683 174,697 101,165 73,532
2022 635,184 . . . 223,535 206,021 17,514 703,317 . . . 204,179 125,679 78,501
2023 645,924 . . . 219,083 201,112 17,971 732,970 . . . 196,741 114,949 81,792
2023 July 620,097 . . . 205,789 187,402 18,386 715,574 . . . 187,682 104,546 83,137
Aug. 614,431 . . . 199,939 181,510 18,429 718,843 . . . 184,415 100,803 83,612
Sep. 632,475 . . . 208,265 189,808 18,457 706,187 . . . 188,714 106,872 81,842
Oct. 636,997 . . . . . . 746,808 . . . 191,350 109,541 81,810
Nov. 655,761 . . . 217,430 199,313 18,118 786,978 . . . 195,044 112,537 82,507
p Dec. 645,924 . . . 219,083 201,112 17,971 732,970 . . . 196,741 114,949 81,792
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are shown
in Table 4 of Section IV., “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not beeneliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the figures
shown in Table XII.7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
82•
XII. External sector
9. ECB`s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly
or monthly
averageAustralia
AUDCanada
CADChina
CNYDenmark
DKKJapan
JPYNorway
NOKSweden
SEKSwitzerland
CHFUnited Kingdom
GBPUnited States
USD
2012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.2848
2013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.3281
2014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.1069
2017 1.4732 1.4647 7.6290 7.4386 126.71 9.3270 9.6351 1.1117 0.87667 1.1297
2018 1.5797 1.5294 7.8081 7.4532 130.40 9.5975 10.2583 1.1550 0.88471 1.1810
2019 1.6109 1.4855 7.7355 7.4661 122.01 9.8511 10.5891 1.1124 0.87777 1.1195
2020 1.6549 1.5300 7.8747 7.4542 121.85 10.7228 10.4848 1.0705 0.88970 1.1422
2021 1.5749 1.4826 7.6282 7.4370 129.88 10.1633 10.1465 1.0811 0.85960 1.1827
2022 1.5167 1.3695 7.0788 7.4396 138.03 10.1026 10.6296 1.0047 0.85276 1.0530
2023 1.6288 1.4595 7.6600 7.4509 151.99 11.4248 11.4788 0.9718 0.86979 1.0813
2022 Sep. 1.4820 1.3187 6.9508 7.4366 141.57 10.1697 10.7840 0.9640 0.87463 0.9904
Oct. 1.5474 1.3477 7.0687 7.4389 144.73 10.3919 10.9503 0.9791 0.87058 0.9826
Nov. 1.5455 1.3708 7.3171 7.4387 145.12 10.3357 10.8798 0.9842 0.86892 1.0201
Dec. 1.5685 1.4379 7.3859 7.4377 142.82 10.4480 10.9859 0.9865 0.86950 1.0589
2023 Jan. 1.5523 1.4474 7.3173 7.4383 140.54 10.7149 11.2051 0.9961 0.88212 1.0769
Feb. 1.5514 1.4400 7.3244 7.4447 142.38 10.9529 11.1725 0.9905 0.88550 1.0715
Mar. 1.6034 1.4649 7.3807 7.4456 143.01 11.2858 11.2276 0.9908 0.88192 1.0706
Apr. 1.6389 1.4792 7.5561 7.4518 146.51 11.5187 11.3370 0.9846 0.88115 1.0968
May 1.6346 1.4687 7.5948 7.4485 148.93 11.7330 11.3697 0.9751 0.87041 1.0868
June 1.6157 1.4414 7.7653 7.4492 153.15 11.7164 11.6766 0.9764 0.85861 1.0840
July 1.6423 1.4618 7.9482 7.4508 155.94 11.3474 11.6343 0.9663 0.85856 1.1058
Aug. 1.6818 1.4703 7.9096 7.4522 157.96 11.4127 11.8117 0.9588 0.85892 1.0909
Sep. 1.6622 1.4458 7.7967 7.4566 157.80 11.4525 11.8417 0.9600 0.86158 1.0684
Oct. 1.6637 1.4474 7.7200 7.4604 158.04 11.6284 11.6472 0.9547 0.86798 1.0563
Nov. 1.6634 1.4828 7.8087 7.4581 161.84 11.7958 11.5475 0.9634 0.87045 1.0808
Dec. 1.6321 1.4653 7.7870 7.4556 157.21 11.5333 11.2028 0.9441 0.86168 1.0903
2024 Jan. 1.6422 1.4631 7.8201 7.4572 159.46 11.3501 11.2834 0.9368 0.85873 1.0905
* Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference
rates, see Statistical Series Exchange rate statistics.
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units … 
1999 January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603    
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399    
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573  
France French franc FRF 6.55957  
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583  
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27        
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399    
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371  
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482      
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386      
2001 January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750      
2007 January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640      
2008 January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009 January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260    
2011 January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466    
2014 January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015 January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280  
2023 January 1 Croatia Croatian kuna HRK 7.53450  

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2024
83•
XII. External sector
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness *
Q1 1999 = 100
Effective exchange rates of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the  Indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness
extended EER group of trading partners  1broad EER group of
trading partners  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 vis-à-vis Based on consumer price indices vis-à-vis 
27 selected industrial countries  4
of which:
Period NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indicesIn real terms
based on
the deflators
of gross
domestic
product  3In real terms
based on
unit labour
costs of
national
economy  3 NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indices TotalEuro area
countriesNon-
euro area
countries 37 countries  527 selected
industrial
countries  437 countries  560 countries  6
1999 96.2 96.1 95.8 96.1 96.5 95.9 97.9 99.6 95.7 97.7 98.3 98.1 97.8
2000 87.0 86.8 85.9 85.6 88.0 86.1 92.0 97.5 85.5 91.1 93.1 92.3 91.2
2001 87.4 87.1 86.6 84.5 90.1 86.9 91.7 96.6 86.1 90.5 93.0 91.7 91.0
2002 89.7 90.3 89.8 88.2 94.4 90.6 92.3 95.7 88.4 91.0 93.5 92.2 91.9
2003 100.5 101.6 101.1 99.4 106.5 101.7 95.9 94.8 97.5 95.3 97.0 96.7 96.8
2004 104.3 105.6 104.3 102.8 111.0 105.6 96.2 93.6 100.0 95.6 98.5 98.2 98.4
2005 102.9 104.3 102.3 101.0 109.1 103.2 94.8 92.1 98.8 93.3 98.5 97.2 96.8
2006 102.9 104.3 101.8 100.0 109.3 102.6 93.6 90.4 98.2 91.6 98.6 96.8 96.0
2007 106.5 107.3 104.1 101.8 112.9 104.8 94.6 89.7 102.1 92.1 100.9 98.3 97.4
2008 110.4 110.3 106.3 105.7 117.8 107.3 95.0 88.4 105.3 91.4 102.4 98.5 97.6
2009 111.9 111.1 107.4 109.3 120.8 108.3 95.3 89.2 104.8 92.1 101.9 98.6 97.9
2010 104.6 103.3 99.1 101.8 112.1 99.3 92.5 88.7 98.3 88.2 98.8 94.3 92.5
2011 104.4 102.4 97.2 100.0 112.9 98.8 92.1 88.4 97.7 87.4 98.2 93.5 91.9
2012 98.6 97.0 91.6 94.1 107.6 94.0 90.1 88.3 92.6 84.8 95.9 90.5 88.9
2013 102.2 100.1 94.7 97.1 112.4 97.0 92.4 88.8 97.6 86.7 98.1 92.3 90.9
2014 102.4 99.5 94.7 97.3 114.7 97.4 93.0 89.6 98.0 87.4 98.2 92.5 91.5
2015 92.5 89.7 86.0 86.6 106.1 88.7 89.8 90.2 89.2 83.6 94.3 87.8 86.9
2016 95.2 91.6 88.3 p 87.8 110.1 90.7 90.7 90.7 90.7 85.0 95.0 88.8 88.1
2017 97.5 93.6 89.5 p 88.7 112.5 92.0 92.0 90.8 93.6 85.8 96.3 89.9 88.9
2018 100.0 95.8 91.1 p 90.4 117.3 95.2 93.3 91.0 96.7 86.8 97.7 91.1 90.8
2019 98.1 93.3 89.3 p 87.8 115.5 92.5 92.3 91.2 93.9 85.9 96.4 89.9 89.4
2020 99.7 93.7 90.1 p 89.1 119.2 93.9 92.6 91.5 94.0 86.6 96.4 90.1 90.1
2021 99.6 93.7 p 89.4 p 87.2 120.5 94.3 93.6 91.9 96.1 86.9 97.4 90.6 90.9
2022 95.3 90.8 p 84.4 p 82.5 116.1 p 90.9 92.3 91.7 93.0 85.3 95.9 89.1 p 89.0
2023 98.1 p 94.0 ... ... 121.8 p 94.7 … … … … p98.0 p 91.3 p 91.6
2021 Aug. 99.4 93.4 p 89.3 p 87.0 120.2 93.9 93.8 92.0 96.3 87.0 97.4 90.7 90.8
Sep. 99.5 93.6 120.1 93.9 97.3 90.6 90.7
Oct. 98.5 92.7 119.2 93.2 96.7 90.0 90.1
Nov. 97.6 91.9 p 87.4 p 85.1 118.4 92.6 93.6 92.4 95.2 86.5 96.1 89.4 89.7
Dec. 97.0 91.4 118.6 92.4 95.8 88.9 89.4
2022 Jan. 96.6 91.4 118.2 p 92.3 96.1 89.0 p 89.4
Feb. 96.8 91.8 p 85.8 p 83.8 118.5 p 92.6 93.0 92.0 94.4 85.8 96.1 89.0 p 89.4
Mar. 95.8 91.5 117.9 p 92.6 96.3 89.5 p 89.9
Apr. 95.0 90.1 116.0 p 90.3 96.1 88.9 p 88.8
May 95.4 90.5 p 84.3 p 82.2 115.8 p 90.1 92.3 91.6 93.2 85.0 96.5 89.5 p 89.1
June 95.7 90.7 116.1 p 90.3 95.7 88.7 p 88.4
July 93.9 89.2 114.1 p 88.9 94.8 87.8 p 87.5
Aug. 93.4 88.9 p 82.5 p 80.9 113.6 p 88.7 91.6 91.6 91.2 84.7 94.5 87.6 p 87.3
Sep. 93.9 89.9 113.9 p 89.4 95.9 89.1 p 88.7
Oct. 94.5 91.3 114.8 p 90.8 96.0 89.7 p 89.4
Nov. 95.7 92.3 p 85.1 p 83.2 116.6 p 92.0 92.4 91.8 93.1 85.8 97.0 90.6 p 90.4
Dec. 96.8 92.6 118.6 p 92.8 96.2 89.7 p 89.8
2023 Jan. 97.1 92.8 119.2 p 93.1 97.5 90.4 p 90.5
Feb. 97.0 93.1 p 86.9 p 85.2 119.3 p 93.4 93.2 91.6 95.4 86.2 97.6 90.5 p 90.6
Mar. 97.3 93.2 119.7 p 93.6 98.1 91.0 p 91.1
Apr. 98.4 94.2 121.5 p 94.8 98.5 91.5 p 91.9
May 98.0 93.6 p 88.1 p 85.6 120.9 p 94.2 93.9 92.1 96.5 87.1 98.0 91.0 p 91.3
June 98.2 93.8 121.8 p 94.7 98.3 91.4 p 91.9
July 99.2 95.0 123.7 p 96.2 98.3 91.8 p 92.4
Aug. 99.0 95.1 p 88.8 p 87.2 123.7 p 96.1 93.8 92.0 96.4 87.5 98.2 91.8 p 92.4
Sep. 98.5 94.7 123.0 p 95.5 98.0 91.7 p 92.1
Oct. 98.0 p 94.1 122.5 p 95.0 97.7 p 91.3 p 91.7
Nov. 98.7 p 94.6 ... ... 123.4 p 95.3 … … … … 98.2 p 91.6 p 91.9
Dec. 98.2 p 94.0 123.2 p 94.9 p97.7 p 91.1 p 91.5
2024 Jan. 98.4 p 94.1 123.6 p 95.0 p98.0 p 91.4 p 91.9
* The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the curren-
cy concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German economy's price
competitiveness is consistent with the procedure to compute the effective exchange
rates of the euro. A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. The
weights are based on trade in manufactured goods and services. For more detailed in-
formation on methodology and weighting scale, see the website of the Deutsche
Bundesbank (https://www.bundesbank.de/content/796162).  1 The calculations are
based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral exchange rates of the
euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the following 18 countries: Australia, Bulgaria, Canada,
China, Czechia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Norway, Poland, Romania,
Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United
States. Where current price and wage indices were not available, estimates were used.
2 Includes countries belonging to the extended EER group of trading partners (fixed
composition) and additionally the following 23 countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil,
Chile, Colombia, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zea-
land, Peru, Philippines, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Taiwan,Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine and United Arab Emirates. The ECB has suspended the
publication and calculation of the euro foreign exchange reference rate against Russian
rouble with effect from March 2, 2022 until further notice. For the calculation of
effective exchange rates, an indicative rate is used for the Russian Federation from that
date. It is calculated from the daily RUB/USD rates determined by the Bank of Russia in
conjunction with the respective ECB's euro foreign exchange reference rate to the US
dollar.  3 Annual and quarterly averages.  4 Euro area countries (from 2001 including
Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta, from
2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including Latvia, from
2015 including Lithuania, from 2023 including Croatia) as well as Canada, Denmark,
Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.
5 Euro area countries (current composition) and countries belonging to the extended
EER group of trading partners (fixed comosition).  6 Euro area countries (current compo-
sition) and countries belonging to the broad EER group of trading partners (fixed
composition).

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
84•

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The printed publications are available free of charge to interested parties and may be 
obtained through the Bundesbank’s order portal. Up-to-date figures for selected statistical 
datasets are available on the Bundesbank’s website, as are also the Statistical Series, with a 
changed basic structure and advanced options for using data.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
A list of the articles published in the period from 
2010 to 2022 is available on the Bundesbank’s 
website.
Monthly Report articles
April 2023
– Money market conditions and remuneration 
of government  deposits
– Household wealth and finances in  Germany: 
Results of the 2021 household wealth survey
– Turning point in payments
– Sustainability risks in banking supervision
May 2023
– The current economic situation in Germany
June 2023
– Arduous recovery amid high and only grad -
ually easing inflation – outlook for the Ger -
man economy up to 2025– Developments in bank interest rates in Ger -
many during the period of monetary policy 
tightening
– The growing significance of central govern -
ment’s off-budget entities
July 2023
– Digital money: options for the financial in -
dustry
– Cross- border liquidity flows – the role of the 
banking system in the German balance of 
payments
– Economic developments in emerging market 
economies: old problems and new chal -
lenges
August 2023
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2023
– Germany as a business location: selected as -
pects of current dependencies and medium- 
term challenges
– Heterogeneous impact of monetary policy in 
the euro area?
– Models for short- term economic fore casting 
during the recent crises
– Member States’ financial relationships with 
the EU budget and the NextGenerationEU 
off- budget entity in 2022Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
85•

– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2022
October 2023
– Is price competitiveness favourable in Ger -
many and the euro area?
– State government finances in 2022: high sur -
plus overall, some states still making exten -
sive recourse to emergency borrowing
November 2023
– The current economic situation in Germany
December 2023
– Falling inflation, but not yet time to sound 
the all- clear – outlook for the German econ -
omy up to 2026
– Model- based recommendations for monet -
ary policy decision- making
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing during the 2022  energy crisis
– Tackling the challenges of crypto-assets – the 
state of play with regulation
January 2024
– Risks facing Germany as a result of its eco -
nomic ties with China
– The outlook for cash – a systematic look at 
the future of cash
February 2024
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Series*
Banks
– Banking statistics, monthly
– Statistics on payments and securities trading, 
September
Corporate financial statements
– Consolidated financial statement statistics, 
June/ December
– Financial statement statistics (extrapolated 
results), December
– Financial statement statistics (ratios), May
– Financial statement statistics (ratios – provi -
sional data), May
Economic activity and prices
– Seasonally adjusted business statistics, 
monthly
Exchange rates
– Exchange rate statistics, monthly
External sector
– Balance of payments statistics, monthly
– Direct investment statistics, April
– International investment position and exter -
nal debt, monthly
Macroeconomic accounting systems
– Financial accounts, June
Money and capital markets
– Capital market indicators, monthly
– Investment funds statistics, monthly
– Securities issues statistics, monthly
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines, July 20231,2
2 Banking statistics, customer classification, 
July 20232
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
86•

3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen , July 
20131,2
7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 2013
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 1
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
19971
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 19991
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:  
MEMMOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik -
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 20051
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20061
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich  von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
20131
Discussion Paperso
24/ 2023  
Towards seasonal adjustment of infra- monthly 
time series with JDemetra+25/ 2023  
Precision- based sampling for state space models 
that have no measurement error
26/2023  
Effects of bank capital requirements on lending 
by banks and non-bank financial institutions
27/2023  
Forceful or persistent: How the ECB’s new infla -
tion target affects households’ inflation expect -
ations
28/2023  
Energy prices and inflation expectations: Evi -
dence from households and firms
29/2023  
Effects of mergers on network models of the 
finan cial system
30/2023  
Staggered difference-in-differences in gravity 
settings: Revisiting the effects of trade agree -
ments
31/2023  
Collateral scarcity and market functioning: In -
sights from the Eurosystem securities lending 
facilities
32/2023  
The macroeconomic effects of inflation uncer -
tainty
33/2023  
The role of emission disclosure for the low-  
carbon transition
34/2023  
Nowcasting consumer price inflation using 
high-frequency scanner data: Evidence from 
Germany
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
87•

01/ 2024  
On household labour supply in sticky- wage 
HANK models
02/ 2024  
Back to the roots of internal credit risk models: 
Does risk explain why banks‘ risk- weighted 
asset levels converge over time?
03/2024  
How good are banks’ forecasts?
04/2024  
The transmission of bank liquidity shocks: Evi -
dence from the Eurosystem collateral frame -
work
05/2024  
Excess reserves and monetary policy tightening
06/2024  
Macroprudential capital regulation and fiscal 
balances in the euro areaBanking legislation
 1 Bundesbank Act, July 2013, and Statute of 
the European System of Central Banks and 
of the European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, 
January  20081
 2a Solvency Regulation and Liquidity Regula -
tion, February 20082
* The Statistical Series replace the Statistical Supplements 
and, in part, the Special Statistical Publications; they will be 
provided exclusively on the Bundesbank’s website under 
Publications/ Statistics.
o Discussion papers published from 2000 are available on -
line.
1 Publication available in German only.
2 Available only as a download.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2024  
88•

