Monthly Report – 
January 2025
Vol. 77 No 1

Table of Content
Economic conditions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
1 The German economy was still listless at the end of the year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
2 Industrial activity remained weak  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
3 Divergent developments continued in construction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
4 Labour market fairly stable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
5 Energy commodity prices up slightly of late  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
6 Inflation rate increased to 2.8%  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
List of references  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
Risk appetite in financial markets and monetary policy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
1 Risk premia and risk appetite  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
Derivation of the risk premium and risk appetite  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
Deriving an index to measure the risk appetite of euro area investors  . . . . . . .  25
Using valuation differences between volatile and low-volatility stocks to 
measure risk appetite  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28
2 Monetary policy and financial markets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  31
Transatlantic transmission of monetary policy and the role of risk appetite  . .  35
3 Macroeconomic effects of monetary policy and risk appetite  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  38
4 Conclusions and outlook  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  41
List of references  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  43

3Economic conditions

Economic conditions
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 41 The German economy was still listless at the end of the 
year
The German economy remained listless in the fourth quarter of 2024.  Based on an 
initial and very early estimate released by the Federal Statistical Office, real  GDP
declined by 0.1% in seasonally adjusted terms . Industry is again likely to have 
remained particularly weak, being under high pressure to adapt to changing structural 
conditions.  Foreign orders remained very sluggish despite some degree of recovery. 
The  Institute’s business climate index deteriorated again. The construction sector is ifo
unlikely to have provided much growth stimulus. A more favourable development in 
civil engineering is still being offset by the decline in building construction. By contrast, 
private consumption and the related services sectors are likely to have provided 
positive impetus. The steep rise in wages provided scope for additional consumer 
spending. However, consumers remained unsettled and this prevented a stronger 
recovery in consumption.  It is also unlikely that the German economy will manage to 
escape the prolonged period of stagnation in the first quarter of 2025. 
Economic output in Germany declined in 2024 as a whole.  According to preliminary 
calculations by the Federal Statistical Office, real  fell by 0.2% on the previous year GDP
(and also by 0.2% after calendar adjustment). High financing costs, heightened 
economic policy uncertainty and the severe capacity underutilisation weighed on invest-
ment. The reduced competitiveness of German industry and high competitive pressure, 
especially from China, were reflected in dwindling exports. Households held back on 
spending despite sharply rising wages. As a result, their saving rate rose while private 
consumption increased only slightly. 1)  2) 
 3) 
 4) 
1 Seasonal adjustment here and in the remainder of this text also includes adjustment for calendar variations, 
provided they can be verified and quantified.
2 This estimate for the fourth quarter of 2024 is based on the Federal Statistical Office’s provisional calculations 
of  for 2024 as a whole. It stems from a smaller dataset than the regular quarterly calculation. The Federal GDP
Statistical Office additionally revised the first three quarters of 2024. The regular flash estimate for  in the GDP
fourth quarter of 2024 will be released on 30 January 2025. See Federal Statistical Office (2025a).
3 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2024).
4 See  (2024).GfK

Economic conditions
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 52 Industrial activity remained weak
Industrial output probably continued to head downwards in the fourth quarter.  In 
November, it rose on the month in seasonally adjusted terms, but averaged over 
October and November it was down somewhat compared with the previous quarter. 
The production of consumer goods, in particular, declined. By contrast, capital goods 
production edged up somewhat, despite a significant decline in the production of 
passenger cars in these two months. This figure is also likely to have dropped in the 
fourth quarter overall as data from the German Association of the Automotive Industry
(  show that the number of cars produced fell sharply in December as well.) VDA
The underlying trend dynamics of demand for German industrial goods stabilised 
somewhat.  In November 2024, new orders in German industry were sharply down on 
the previous month in seasonally adjusted terms owing to a decline in large orders. 
Averaged across October and November, there was also a marked decrease compared 
with the previous quarter. Excluding large orders, however, there was a certain 
increase in orders both from Germany and abroad compared with the previous 
quarter. This meant that new orders from abroad continued the trend of recovery seen 
in the previous two quarters. However, this is unlikely to be enough to boost industrial 
activity perceptibly.  Institute industry surveys point to further weakness. Short-term ifo
production plans and export expectations have deteriorated recently, for example.

Economic conditions
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 6


Economic conditions
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 73 Divergent developments continued in construction
Construction output increased recently.  After seasonal adjustment, it was up signifi-
cantly on the month in November, and averaged over October and November it was 
likewise somewhat higher than in the previous quarter. The increase was driven by 
finishing trades and civil engineering. By contrast, the decline in building construction 
continued. Building construction and civil engineering have developed differently since 
the beginning of 2022. Building construction has been on a marked downward trajec-
tory since then owing to higher financing costs and construction prices as well as the 
strong income losses for households. Civil engineering, meanwhile, remained broadly 
stable. Construction activity is likely to have been largely supported by investment in 
infrastructure. These differing developments look set to continue. In October, new 
orders in building construction remained considerably below the level at the end of 
2021, whereas in civil engineering they were up significantly as compared with end-
2021. The still high demand for infrastructure measures is likely to have been a factor 
here. Despite the recent increase in construction output overall, the situation in the 
construction industry remains difficult. According to surveys conducted by the  Insti-ifo
tute, 39% of firms in the main construction sector were affected by a lack of orders in 
the fourth quarter. Compared with the previous quarter, the share has consequently 
actually edged slightly higher.

Economic conditions
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 84 Labour market fairly stable
Total employment recently developed more favourably than expected in the Decem-
ber Forecast for Germany, despite job losses in the manufacturing sector . Follow-
ing the notable decline in the summer months, the Federal Statistical Office reported a 
slight seasonally adjusted increase in employment for both October (+12,000 persons) 
and November (+23,000 persons) in its estimate. This is due, in particular, to the slight 
improvement in developments in employment subject to social security contributions. 
The decline in the manufacturing sector actually intensified further. However, this was 
more than offset by an increase especially in healthcare and social services, business-re-
lated services (excluding temporary agency work) and transport and logistics. Short-
time work also continues to be used almost exclusively in the manufacturing sector.  
Developments in the total number of employees in Germany is also being dampened 
by a significant fall in low-paid part-time employment of late and a declining trend in 
self-employment.  5) 
 6) 
5 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2024), Chapter 1.2 “Temporary marked weakening of labour market”.
6 According to an initial estimate by the Federal Employment Agency, the use of short-time work for economic 
reasons rose significantly in October to 287,000 affected employees. Up to the end of 2024, there was no relief 
for firms wishing to use short-time work in terms of access requirements, duration and social security contribu-
tions to be paid, as had repeatedly been granted in the past in times of crisis. At the beginning of 2025, the 
period of entitlement to short-time working benefits for economic reasons was extended to 24 months for a 
limited period. See Federal Law Gazette (2024).

Economic conditions
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 9However, the comparatively pleasing employment developments over the past two 
months are not an indication of a positive trend reversal in the future.  Signals from 
leading indicators deteriorated further. The  employment barometer, which provides ifo
information about planned staffing levels in trade and industry over the next three 
months and was already deep in negative territory, declined further in December. 
However, this may also be because firms are taking a “wait-and-see” approach before 
the snap Bundestag elections. The  employment barometer, which covers the entire IAB
economy, also went down further, but this indicator remains in slightly positive terri-
tory. This is in line with stable or slightly rising employment. The inflow of new vacant 
positions reported to the Federal Employment Agency remained weak. At the same 
time, the number of vacancies is still comparatively high, and vacant positions often 
take a long time to fill. 
Unemployment rose only minimally in December.  After seasonal adjustment, around 
2.87 million people were registered as unemployed, 9,000 more than in November. The 
unemployment rate held steady at 6.1% due to rounding. The outflow rate from 
unemployment into employment is very low. Due to the structural shifts, it is currently 
difficult for unemployed persons to find employment in their old profession or in the 


Economic conditions
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 10same sector. Registered unemployment could rise more significantly again in the 
coming months. The  unemployment barometer has fallen further into negative IAB
territory, which is an indication of rising unemployment.  

Economic conditions
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 115 Energy commodity prices up slightly of late
Energy commodity prices picked up somewhat recently.  Prices of crude oil, in particu-
lar, rose markedly. As this report went to press, a barrel of Brent crude oil cost $83, US
around 10% more than as recently as November. This was mainly due to new  US
sanctions targeting the Russian oil sector, which are likely to disrupt deliveries of 
Russian oil. Gas prices also picked up somewhat after the expiry of the transit agree-
ment between Russia and Ukraine, meaning that Russia can no longer export gas via 
Ukraine. In addition, prices were propped up by unfavourable weather conditions 
which were accompanied by higher demand for gas.

Economic conditions
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 126 Inflation rate increased to 2.8%
Price developments at the upstream stages of the economy were uneven.  Import 
prices were recently up very significantly compared with the previous month. This was 
the case for both energy and other goods. By contrast, price developments in industrial 
domestic sales were fairly subdued both in aggregate terms and in the sub-compo-
nents. For the first time in around one and a half years, prices were once again clearly 
up on the year. They were just over ½% higher for imports and up around ¾% for 
domestic industrial sales. 
The inflation rate was significantly higher again in December, partly due to a base 
effect.  The Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices  rose by 0.3% on the month in ( ) HICP
seasonally adjusted terms, after prices had fallen slightly in the previous month.  
Energy prices remained virtually unchanged on the previous month, and food prices 
also rose only slightly. Services became markedly more expensive again, however. In 
addition, prices for non-energy industrial goods picked up strongly, following rather 
subdued price developments in the preceding months. Looking at the year-on-year 
figure, headline inflation rose significantly from 2.4% to 2.8%.  However, this was due 
in part to relatively low energy prices at the end of 2023. Core inflation excluding 
energy and food likewise picked up slightly from 3.1% to 3.3%.
Nevertheless, the disinflation process continued in 2024.  On average over the past 
year, the previously still exceptionally high inflation rate dropped significantly. As 
measured by the  it fell from 6.0% to 2.5%.  This was due to falling energy prices, , HICP
but also to declining inflation in the case of other non-energy industrial goods. By 
contrast, the inflation rate for services remained far above average, partly owing to 
steep wage growth. 7) 
 8) 
 9) 
7 From December 2024 onwards, prices are collected according to a new catalogue. As a result, the comparabil-
ity of results with the previous month is limited in some cases. The year-on-year comparison is likely to be only 
marginally affected, however. See Federal Statistical Office (2025b).
8 The annual rate of inflation as measured by the national Consumer Price Index  rose from 2.2% to 2.6%. ( )CPI
9 CPI inflation stood at 2.2%, down from 5.9%.

Economic conditions
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 13In early 2025, inflation is likely to remain high initially.  This is due to the further 
increase in the carbon price on fossil fuels as well as higher prices for the “Deutsch-
landticket” and for private health insurance.  The inflation rate is likely to come back 
down in the coming months. The recent very steep inflation for services will decline 
markedly, but it will still remain significantly above its longer-term average. 
 10) 
10 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2024).

Economic conditions
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 14List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2024), Forecast for Germany: Significantly gloomier growth 
outlook – inflation decreases to 2% , Monthly Report, December 2024 .
Federal Law Gazette (2024), Dritte Verordnung über die Bezugsdauer für das Kurzarbeit-
ergeld  of 20 December 2024 .
Federal Statistical Office (2025a), Gross domestic product down 0.2% in 2024 , press 
release of 15 January 2025 . 
Federal Statistical Office (2025b), Inflation rate at + 2.2% in 2024 , press release of 
16 January 2025 . 
GfK (2024),  Consumer climate: Slight recovery at the end of the year, modest outlook 
for 2025 , press release of 19 December 2024.  

15Risk appetite in financial 
markets and monetary 
policy

Risk appetite in financial markets and monetary policy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 16Risk premia are returns in excess of the risk-free rate that investors receive for taking risks in 
financial markets. Their size varies depending on the financial market segment and can 
fluctuate significantly over time. In recent years, there have been periods of abrupt turbu-
lence and large declines in prices in the equity and bond markets, which were accompanied 
by rising risk premia, as well as prolonged periods of optimism with low risk premia. Such 
dynamics pose a challenge for monetary policy, as risk premia significantly influence the 
financing costs of households and enterprises. 
There is also evidence that monetary policy itself can change risk premia. The risk-taking 
channel of monetary policy is a mechanism through which monetary policy measures affect 
investors’ risk appetite, which is to say their willingness to take risks. The focus of this article 
is on investors’ risk appetite, as a greater (lower) willingness to take risks lowers (raises) risk 
premia on all financial assets in an economy. Empirical evidence suggests that monetary 
policy easing increases risk appetite, while tightening reduces it. Up to now, however, studies 
have focused primarily on the United States. 
This article analyses these relationships from the perspective of the Eurosystem, using a new 
broad-based indicator of risk appetite in the euro area. This indicator measures investors’ 
risk appetite by using statistical methods to extract the common variation of numerous risk 
measures from different financial market segments in the euro area. Risk appetite in the 
euro area is time-varying and moves in line with the business cycle, thereby reinforcing 
movements in risk premia, especially in times of crisis. Risk appetite in the euro area largely 
mirrors global developments. At the same time, however, the indicator also responds to euro 
area-specific developments – the European sovereign debt crisis being one such example. 
An event study presented here concludes that an unexpected monetary policy tightening by 
the Eurosystem dampens euro area investors’ risk appetite, increasing risk premia and thus 
amplifying the price decline of risky assets. At the same time, the reduced risk appetite 
dampens the appreciation pressure on the nominal effective exchange rate of the euro 
against the currencies of 18 countries. This shows that the Eurosystem’s monetary policy also 
has a significant impact on euro area financial markets via the risk-taking channel. Addition-
ally, this channel contributes to the transatlantic transmission of monetary policy, with  US
monetary policy, in particular, affecting financial market developments in the euro area via 
this channel.
Looking at the Eurosystem, the risk-taking channel could strengthen or reduce the effective-
ness of monetary policy measures on economic activity and prices. This article therefore uses 
an estimated dynamic macro-financial model to examine the direction in which the risk-tak-

Risk appetite in financial markets and monetary policy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 17ing channel works in monetary policy transmission. The results show that, considered in 
isolation, the risk-taking channel strengthens monetary policy transmission in the euro area, 
further supporting its relevance to monetary policy. In a counterfactual scenario without an 
effective risk-taking channel, monetary policy transmission to economic activity and prices is 
markedly weaker. This reflects the fact that the cost of capital for economic agents and asset 
prices would be less sensitive to the change in risk-free interest rates. 
The analysis is also a helpful aid in better assessing the impact of key interest rate hikes 
between July 2022 and September 2023 through financial markets. According to the findings, 
the monetary policy tightening cycle is likely to have dampened risk appetite. At the same 
time, though, other factors, including a rapidly improving economic environment, supported 
investors’ risk appetite. The results suggest that a dynamic economic environment mitigated 
the dampening effect of monetary policy on risk appetite, meaning that risk premia 
increased less sharply than in the past.

Risk appetite in financial markets and monetary policy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 181 Risk premia and risk appetite
Risk appetite, the willingness of investors to take risks, changes over time in 
response to macroeconomic conditions.  As it changes, asset prices can fluctuate 
sharply. An abrupt decrease in market participants’ willingness to take risks can amplify 
price declines in financial markets. Examples of such events include the financial and 
sovereign debt crisis, the United Kingdom’s decision not to remain in the  (Brexit), theEU
19 pandemic and Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine. By contrast, - COVID
optimistic periods when risk appetite is high support markets. This underscores the 
importance of market participants’ risk appetite from a monetary policy perspective.  
Monetary policy itself also exerts a significant influence on the risk appetite of 
economic agents.  The tendency of monetary policy to influence investors’ risk appetite 
is referred to as the risk-taking channel of monetary policy transmission: monetary 
policy easing (tightening) translates into a higher (lower) risk appetite amongst 
investors.  Empirical evidence suggests that  monetary policy, in particular, affects US
investors’ risk appetite both in the United States and globally.  Against this 
background, this article examines how Eurosystem monetary policy impacts the risk 
appetite of investors in the euro area.
Investors’ risk appetite is a key concept in the valuation of financial assets.  To illus-
trate this, it is helpful to break down the expected return on financial assets into a risk-
free and a risky component, the risk premium.  The risk premium consists of the 
quantity of risk associated with a specific asset and the market price per unit of risk (see 
Chart 2.1). A security’s quantity of risk depends on the type of financial instrument and 
its specific characteristics. For example, investors demand risk compensation for 
various types of risk in fixed income securities, such as interest rate risk, liquidity risk 
and default risk. The amount of this compensation depends on specific characteristics 
of the bond, such as its maturity and the creditworthiness of the issuer. In addition, the  1) 
 2) 
 3) 
1 See Borio and Zhu (2012), Adrian and Shin (2010), Acharya and Naqvi (2012), Bekaert et al. (2013), Jiménez et al. 
(2014), Buch et al. (2014).
2 See Kalemli-Özcan (2019), Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2020), Bauer et al. (2023).
3 See Cochrane (2005), Deutsche Bundesbank (2016).

Risk appetite in financial markets and monetary policy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 19size of the risk premium demanded by investors for all securities in an economy 
depends on the market price of risk. Risk appetite, the willingness of investors to take 
risks, is commonly defined as the inverse of the market price of risk (see the supplemen-
tary information entitled “ ”). If Derivation of the risk premium and risk appetite
investors are more willing to take risks, it means that they accept a lower risk premium 
on all financial assets in an economy, meaning that the market price of risk falls. This 
makes risk appetite a key concept in the valuation of financial assets. Risk appetite itself 
depends on two factors. The first is investors’ risk preferences, which reflect the extent 
to which they disregard uncertainty about the future level of their consumption expen-
diture. Second, the general macroeconomic environment plays a crucial role as it influ-
ences the level of this uncertainty.
 4) 
 5) 
4 See Gai und Vause (2006).
5 Economic uncertainty can be measured as the standard deviation of consumption growth; see Cochrane 
(2005).

Risk appetite in financial markets and monetary policy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 20Supplementary information
Derivation of the risk premium and risk appetite
The risk premium is the product of an asset-specific quantity of risk and the market 
price of risk.  According to traditional asset pricing theory, in efficient, complete and 
arbitrage-free markets with rational investors and perfect information, the price   of a 
given asset   in  equals the present value of the future payoff of that asset   in  .
The future payoff   derives from the future price of the asset   and a potential 
dividend  , meaning  . This relationship is shown in the basic price 
equation (1).
The present value is determined using a discount factor, \(m_{t+1}\), which is stochastic 
and mainly depends on the risk preferences of investors and the macroeconomic 
environment. Under the given assumptions, the stochastic discount factor is unique 
and the same for all financial assets in an economy. 
It is common practice to express price equation (1) in gross returns,  , by divid-
ing by  : 
Equation (2) implies that the expected value of the stochastic discount factor 
 equals the risk-free discount factor  , where   is the risk-free interest rate known in 
.
Applying the shift rule for covariance results in:
 1) 
1 See Cochrane (2005) and Deutsche Bundesbank (2016).

Equation (4) states that the expected risk premium of a risky asset, the difference 
between the expected gross return and the risk-free interest rate, is proportional to the 
covariance, multiplied by minus one, between the state-dependent return on the asset 
and the stochastic discount factor. Intuitively, the covariance describes the systematic 
fluctuations of the return   of the asset with investors’ risk preferences and the 
macroeconomic environment. 
The risk premium,  , can now be expressed as the product of the asset-spe-Risk appetite in financial markets and monetary policy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 21and using   gives:
cific quantity of risk,  , and the market price of risk,  ,
Risk appetite is defined as the inverse of the market price of risk.  Under the above 
assumptions, the market price of risk,  , is the same for all assets in an economy and 
describes the risk premium demanded by investors for each unit of risk that they hold 
in equilibrium. In the literature, it is common to refer to the inverse of the market price 
of risk as risk appetite – that is, investors’ willingness to take on risk.  When risk 
appetite increases, meaning investors grow more willing to take on risk, the risk 
premium demanded by investors for each unit of risk falls. Thus, the market price of 
risk, and consequently risk appetite, depend on the macroeconomic environment and 
the risk preferences of investors. 2) 
2 See Gai and Vause (2006).
}  }  

Risk appetite in financial markets and monetary policy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 22Risk appetite in the euro area can be measured using empirical methods.  To this 
end, this analysis uses a new daily and broad-based risk appetite index for the euro 
area (see the supplementary information entitled “ Deriving an index to measure the 
”). This index measures investors’ risk appetite by risk appetite of euro area investors
using principal component analysis to extract the common daily variation of individual 
risk measures from five asset segments.  The new index explains a large proportion of 
the common variation of the relevant risk measures for European stocks and bonds. It 
therefore appears well suited to contextualising developments in the euro area and 
comparing them with global or  measures. This assessment is further supported by US
the index’s close correlation with another indicator that measures risk appetite based 
on valuation differences between volatile and low-volatility stocks at the quarterly data 
level (see the supplementary information entitled “ Using valuation differences 
”). between volatile and low-volatility stocks to measure risk appetite
Risk appetite in the euro area is time-varying and moves in line with the business 
cycle  (see Chart 2.2)  Specifically, the indicator shows that investors’ risk appetite .
decreases in tandem with adverse macroeconomic developments, such as during the 
global financial crisis or the 19 pandemic. The decline in risk appetite leads - COVID
investors to demand higher risk premia for holding the same quantity of risk associated 
with risky assets. Research suggests that, particularly in such crisis environments, the 
risk aversion of households and financial intermediaries can increase considerably.  
Accordingly, households increasingly shy away from exposure to risky assets in order 
to secure their desired level of consumption during crises.  Such environments also 
typically lead to valuation losses. Valuation losses reduce the assets of economic  6) 
 7) 
 8) 
 9) 
6 See Hartwig (2025).
7 See Miranda-Agrippino und Rey (2020), Bauer et al. (2023). For alternative approaches, see Brave und Butters 
(2012), Datta et al. (2017), Bekaert et al. (2022), Adrian et al. (2023).
8 See Cochrane (2017) for an overview.
9 See Campbell und Cochrane (1999).

Risk appetite in financial markets and monetary policy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 23agents, thus narrowing their scope for borrowing and lending. They face what are 
known as balance sheet constraints. This can, in particular, limit the risk-bearing capac-
ity of financial intermediaries and thus increase their risk aversion.  Moreover, 
economic uncertainty typically increases in an adverse macro environment, contribut-
ing to a decline in risk appetite.  
The risk appetite index for the euro area tends to move in line with global financial 
market developments.  The high degree of co-movement between the risk appetite 
index in the euro area and the corresponding indices for  or global risk appetite US
suggests that, to a large extent, globally active investors determine risk appetite in the 
euro area (see Chart 2.2).  At the same time, the indicator highlights episodes in 
which risk appetite in the euro area deviates from global developments. For example, 
this was the case during the European sovereign debt crisis from 2010 to 2012. At that 
time, investors were concerned about the sustainability of government debt in some 
euro area member countries and the economic outlook for the euro area. Risk appetite 
 10) 
 11) 
 12) 
10 The risk-bearing capacity of financial intermediaries depends on, amongst other things, regulatory require-
ments and self-imposed risk limits. See Adrian und Shin (2010), He und Krishnamurthy (2013), Haddad und 
Muir (2021), Deutsche Bundesbank (2018, 2021).
11 See Bansal und Yaron (2004). In addition to an adverse economic climate, economic uncertainty can also rise 
due to an increase in political uncertainty or asymmetric information on the value of risky assets; see Bloom 
(2009), Jurado et al. (2015), Baker et al. (2016), Ludvigson et al. (2021) and Adrian et al. (2023).
12 See Miranda-Agrippino und Rey (2020). The correlation between the risk appetite measures is above 0.85.

Risk appetite in financial markets and monetary policy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 24in the euro area fell significantly as a result, contributing to European stocks and corpo-
rate bonds coming under much greater pressure than those in the United States or at 
the global level. In addition, the daily availability of the euro area indicator proves 
useful for contextualising current financial market developments in real time (see Chart 
2.2). One example of this is the risk-off movement in the euro area, an investment shift 
from riskier assets to safer assets, following the announcement of snap parliamentary 
elections in France in June 2024. The associated decline in risk appetite remained 
largely confined to the euro area. It therefore put pressure almost exclusively on 
European financial markets, with global financial markets and risk appetite measures 
proving robust.

Risk appetite in financial markets and monetary policy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 25Supplementary information
Deriving an index to measure the risk appetite of euro 
area investors
The indicator presented here measures euro area investors’ risk appetite based on 
the common daily change in 13 individual indicators from five different asset classes 
(see Table 2.1).  Risk appetite, defined as the inverse of the market price of risk, is 
theoretically the same for all financial assets in an economy of arbitrage-free and 
complete financial markets. So when risk appetite changes, the risk premia on all risky 
assets and thus their prices change. Given that risk appetite is reflected equally in all 
risk premia, it can be derived from individual indicators using principal component 
analysis.  In this exercise, 13 individual indicators are used. They are key benchmarks 
for euro area financial markets and reflect not only asset-specific risk but also general 
risk appetite. Daily risk appetite is defined here as the first principal component of the 
standardised daily change in these 13 individual indicators. By definition, the first princi-
pal component explains the highest share of the total variance.  All in all, at over 30%, 
the first principal component explains a considerable share of the common variation of 
these individual indicators and thus significantly more than other risk (appetite) indica-
tors.  The index is normalised so that a rise in the index corresponds to an increase in 
risk appetite. The level of risk appetite is calculated as the standardised sum of daily 
index values.
The risk appetite indicator for the euro area is a broad measure that reflects risk 
measures in equity and bond markets to a similarly strong degree.  All 13 individual  1) 
 2) 
 3) 
 4) 
 5) 
1 See Hartwig (2025).
2 See Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2020) as well as Bauer et al. (2023). Principal component analysis is an estab-
lished statistical method for capturing the information within a dataset with a small number of ideally 
meaningful linear combinations of the principal components.
3 The first principal component is determined using the first eigenvector of the correlation matrix of the 13 
financial market indicators and the standardised data, which have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of 
one.
4 The corresponding indicators for  and global risk appetite explain 13% and 20%, respectively, of the US
common variation of individual indicators for the euro area. The Bloomberg and Goldman Sachs financial 
conditions indices explain only around 7% and 13% of the common variation, respectively.
5 The indicator thus has a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one.

Risk appetite in financial markets and monetary policy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 26indicators contribute to the risk appetite indicator with the expected sign (Table 2.1). 
Accordingly, an increasing risk appetite is associated with rising stock prices, declining 
financial market volatility, narrower yield spreads and a depreciation in currencies that 
act as safe havens against the euro (US dollar and Swiss franc). The equity market-re-
lated variables (the two equity indices and the VSTOXX volatility index) have the highest 
weight in the index, followed by the yield spreads on corporate bonds (Table 2.1, 
column 2). Overall, according to a variance analysis, the equity and bond market 
variables explain a similarly large share of the daily common variation of these indica-
tors (Table 2.1, column 3).
     
Financial market indicators Index coefficient Covariance share (%)
Equity market .  34.43
EURO STOXX index 0.41 17.12
EURO STOXX Banks index 0.42 17.31
Volatility .  19.65
Implied volatility of the EURO 
STOXX 50 in 30 days (VSTOXX)  1− 0.37 14.03
Implied volatility of Bund 
future options with a maturity 
of three months− 0.11 1.29
Implied volatility of euro- US 
dollar options with a maturity of 
three months − 0.21 4.33
Government bonds .  11.02
Spread of ten-year - GDP
weighted  bonds EMU2− 0.298.34
Spread dispersion of ten-year
 bonds EMU2− 0.162.68
Corporate bonds . 30.08
iBoxx euro area AA spread (7‑10 
years)3− 0.30 8.98
iBoxx euro area BBB spread 
(7‑10 years)3− 0.34 11.28
ICE BofA euro area high-yield 
option-adjusted spread (all 
maturities)− 0.31 9.83
Foreign exchange market .  4.81
Exchange rate of the  dollar US − 0.11 1.21Table 2.1 Components of the daily risk appetite index for the euro area

Risk appetite in financial markets and monetary policy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 27against the euro4
Exchange rate of the Swiss 
franc against the euro4− 0.17 2.92
Euro-  dollar basis for 3-US
month money market opera-
tions5− 0.09 0.78
Sources: Bloomberg and Bundesbank calculations. The index coefficient (column 2) indicates the 
weight that each individual indicator takes within the risk appetite index for the euro area (the 
components of the first eigenvector of the correlation matrix of the 13 financial market indica-
tors). Stock prices and exchange rates are included in the index as daily logarithmic price differ-
ences; volatility indicators are daily changes measured in index points; bond spreads and their 
dispersion are daily changes measured in percentage points. The sign of the risk appetite index 
is normalised such that an increase in the index corresponds to an increase in risk appetite. The 
covariance share (column 3) is defined as the covariance of the respective standardised individ-
ual indicator with the daily change in the risk appetite index divided by the variance of the daily 
change in the risk appetite index. The covariance shares add up to one.  The VSTOXX has been 1
available since 1 January 2007; earlier values are taken from the VDAX.  Spreads relative to the 2
yield on ten-year Bunds.  Spreads relative to the matched-maturity Bund yield as measured by 3
the corresponding iBoxx index. The iBoxx data have been available since 23 May 2002; earlier 
values are taken from the corresponding  BofA indices and the ten-year Bund yield.  An ICE 4
increase in the exchange rate corresponds to a depreciation in the euro against its partner 
currency.  An increase in the swap basis corresponds to higher  dollar financing costs for 5 US
banks in the euro area through foreign exchange swaps compared with direct refinancing in the
 money markets; see also Deutsche Bundesbank (2022).US
 
 

Risk appetite in financial markets and monetary policy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 28Supplementary information
Using valuation differences between volatile and low-
volatility stocks to measure risk appetite
This supplementary information presents, in the sense of a robustness analysis, an 
alternative measure of risk appetite (the price of volatile stocks, or ),PVS  defined as 
the book-to-market ratio of low-volatility stocks minus the book-to-market ratio of 
high-volatility stocks.  Expanding on the existing body of literature for the United 
States, the measure is also calculated for the euro area.  Overall, the analysis 
indicates that the  measure in both currency areas correlates relatively closely with PVS
the corresponding risk appetite indices based on principal component analyses (see the
supplementary information on deriving an index to measure the risk appetite of 
) and investors in the euro area for details on the risk appetite index for the euro area
with key macro variables as well. As a result, this supports the robustness of the analy-
sis using the principal component risk appetite indices described above. 
The study builds on a broad corporate dataset for the euro area and the United 
States.  The sample comprises all enterprises that have been included in the Euro Stoxx 
or S&P 500 at least once at the beginning of the year in the observation period since 
1999.  In total, there are 640 European and 1,064  enterprises. The  measure is US PVS
calculated in quarterly data.
The PVS measure is defined as the difference between the (arithmetic) average 
book-to-market (BM) ratio of low-volatility stocks and the (arithmetic) average BM 
ratio of high-volatility stocks.  This measure is calculated by sorting all the stocks into 
five volatility quintiles at the end of each quarter.  Stocks in the lowest (highest) volatil-
ity quintile are defined as low volatility (high volatility). The  measure is based on PVS
the intuition that highly volatile stocks should be particularly sensitive to changes in  1) 
 2) 
 3) 
1 The  measure of risk appetite was first presented by Pflueger et al. (2020) for  enterprises. PVS US
2 In the euro area, only enterprises in the Euro Stoxx since 2002 are included. Furthermore, one-quarter-ahead 
stock prices and the book-to-market ratio must be available for these firms.
3 Volatility is based on stock returns in the past two months (44 days) and is fed into the  measure provided PVS
there are at least 20 stock return observations in the past two months.

Risk appetite in financial markets and monetary policy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 29risk appetite. Furthermore, in terms of their investment behaviour, these enterprises 
can be expected to resemble many unlisted enterprises that significantly shape the 
aggregate economy.  Their valuation should therefore visibly reflect the risk appetite 
relevant to the economy as a whole. For example, when the prices of high-volatility 
stocks increase, their BM ratio declines. Assuming the BM ratio of low-volatility stocks 
remains comparatively stable, this will raise the  measure, thus indicating that PVS
investors are more willing to take risks.
The PVS measure is closely correlated with the principal component risk appetite 
indices.  Comparing the  measure with other relevant risk measures helps to put it PVS
into context. The comparison observes not just the principal component risk appetite 
indices described above, but also measures of volatility in equity and sovereign bond 
markets.  The comparison furthermore takes into account a measure that reflects the 
dispersion of earnings estimates of enterprises with high-volatility and low-volatility 
stock prices.  According to the comparison based on a correlation analysis, the  PVS
measure on both sides of the Atlantic is the measure that correlates the closest with 
the corresponding risk appetite indices derived from principal component analysis 
(euro area: ρ=0.65, United States: ρ=0.80). The correlation between the  indicators PVS
and the dispersion of earnings estimates and volatility indicators is somewhat weaker 
and, as expected, negative. 
The PVS measure likewise correlates with key macro variables like the real rate of 
interest and reflects new macroeconomic information.  The coefficient of a simple 
linear regression of the  measure for the respective currency area on the corre-PVS
sponding one-year real rate of interest is positive and significant in each case. This 
would suggest that a stronger risk appetite is usually associated with stronger growth, 
meaning that risk appetite can also be interpreted as a cyclical indicator. This proposi-
tion is also supported by the positive correlation that likewise exists between the  PVS
measure and upside surprises in  growth or corporate earnings growth. GDP 4) 
 5) 
 6) 
 7) 
4 See Pflueger et al. (2020).
5 For equity markets, the options-implied volatility of the Euro Stoxx and S&P 500 are used as measures of stock 
volatility. For sovereign bond markets, the implied volatility of German and  sovereign bonds is observed (the US
volatility of Bund futures and the  index). MOVE
6 This dispersion measure is constructed in much the same way as the  measure. It is calculated by first PVS
determining enterprise-level risk in the form of the normalised dispersion of 12-month earnings estimates, as 
sourced from I/B/E/S analyst estimates. The aggregated dispersion measure is the median of this risk for 
enterprises with highly volatile stock prices (highest volatility quintile) less the median of this risk for enter-
prises with low-volatility stock prices (lowest volatility quintile).
7 Surprises are defined here as deviations in realised values from the corresponding survey-based expectations (
: estimates by Consensus Economics; corporate earnings: I/B/E/S analyst estimates). GDP

Risk appetite in financial markets and monetary policy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 30In some cases, the PVS measures signal transatlantic differentials in risk appetite. 
The  measure for the euro area fell notably as a result of the financial and sover-PVS
eign debt crisis, the  membership referendum in the United Kingdom in 2016, and EU
the outbreak of the pandemic in 2020 (see Chart 2.3). Following the onset of the war in 
Ukraine in 2022, it declined at a relatively measured pace. The  measure for the PVS
United States fell more strongly still during the financial crisis and the pandemic, but 
proved to be relatively robust to the European sovereign debt crisis and Brexit. Much 
like the measure based on principal component analysis, then, the  measure helps PVS
to identify the euro area-specific risk appetite and to put it into an international context.


Risk appetite in financial markets and monetary policy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 312 Monetary policy and financial markets
Monetary policy influences the prices of financial assets via various transmission 
channels.  When the central bank raises policy rates in response to an overheating 
economy, risk-free interest rates with longer maturities will generally rise as well.  
This reduces the present value of future cash flows and, thus, the prices of financial 
assets. In addition, tighter monetary policy reduces firms’ expected profits through its 
dampening impact on economic activity, which further depresses asset prices. 
Ultimately, investors can demand higher risk premia if policy rates rise unexpectedly, 
because specific quantities of risk increase by different amounts. In particular, investors 
demand higher risk premia from those enterprises whose default risk goes up in a 
weaker economic environment. And lastly, monetary policy tightening can reduce risk 
appetite in financial markets.
Monetary policy tightening can increase investors’ risk appetite through heightened 
uncertainty and decreased risk aversion.  Risk aversion may go up as a result of a 
monetary policy-induced rise in risk-free interest rates. This is based on the idea that 
investors with predefined nominal return targets can achieve the same expected total 
return on their portfolio if they shift into risk-free assets. As a result, this group of 
investors reduces the share of risky assets in their portfolios. Other investors now have 
to hold the riskier assets that were sold and are only willing to do so in return for a  13) 
 14) 
 15) 
 16) 13 In addition to standard monetary policy, the Governing Council of the  can also influence risk-free interest ECB
rates via non-standard monetary policy measures, by conducting balance sheet operations such as the 
expanded asset purchase programme and the pandemic emergency purchase programme.
14 This can be shown for the risk premia in various financial market segments, such as equity markets and 
markets for government and corporate bonds; see Bernanke und Kuttner (2005), Gertler und Karadi (2015), 
Hanson et al. (2021), Bauer et al. (2023).
15 See Borio und Zhu (2012), Bauer et al. (2023), Kashyap und Stein (2023) for an overview.

Risk appetite in financial markets and monetary policy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 32higher risk premium.  Moreover, tighter monetary policy dampens consumption 
levels and economic prospects. This makes investors more risk-averse. A monetary 
policy-induced increase in risk-free interest rates can also cause economic agents to 
run into the greater balance sheet constraints explained above. Together with the 
aforementioned effects on economic activity, this can elevate economic uncertainty.
Using an event study, the following sections of this article explore how monetary 
policy measures affect euro area financial markets via the risk-taking channel.  To 
this end, monetary policy surprise components directly connected with the Governing 
Council of the ’s monetary policy decisions are identified.  These monetary policy ECB
surprise components are then used in an event study to empirically analyse the 
response of the risk appetite index together with the prices of risky assets, risk-free 
interest rate expectations and selected exchange rates against the euro over time. 
According to the event study, market participants’ short to medium-term interest rate 
expectations, measured by the response of the two-year euro area  rate, increase OIS
by 25 basis points following an unexpected restrictive monetary policy impulse from 
the Eurosystem (see Chart 2.4). 16) 
 17) 
 18) 
16 See Campbell und Sigalov (2022).
17 See Adrian et al. (2023).
18 The monetary policy surprise component is defined as the part of the intra-day change in the two-year euro 
area overnight index swap  rate on the day of the s Governing Council meeting that is positively corre- ( )OIS 'ECB
lated with the movement of euro area yield spreads on long-term corporate bonds; see Hartwig (2025). This 
identification strategy can be justified on the basis of the above-described effect of monetary policy on enter-
prises’ balance sheet position. This kind of model-based identification is needed because an immediate 
increase in the two-year euro area  rate on the day of the s Governing Council meeting does not necessar- OIS 'ECB
ily reflect a tighter monetary policy impulse. Instead, non-monetary policy factors such as an unexpectedly 
strong response to the macroeconomic environment by the Governing Council or an unexpectedly optimistic 
economic outlook from the Governing Council can also cause interest rate expectations to rise; see Romer and 
Romer (2000), Cieslak and Schrimpf (2019), Bauer and Swanson (2023b). The empirical analysis looks at 
changes in the two-year euro area  rate because they provide a comprehensive measure of the change in OIS
short to medium-term policy rate expectations; see Kerssenfischer (2022), Deutsche Bundesbank (2023).

Risk appetite in financial markets and monetary policy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 33An unexpected monetary policy tightening by the Eurosystem triggers a persistent 
and economically significant risk-off movement in financial markets.  This is reflected 
in declining equity prices, higher equity market volatility and larger spreads on corpo-
rate bonds. In addition, investors’ risk appetite decreases and continues to dwindle 
over time. This implies that the impact of monetary policy on investors’ risk appetite is 
not just limited to the short term. Rather, the results suggest that it amplifies the risk-
off movement of equities and bonds over time, thus indicating that the risk-taking 
channel has an economically significant effect in the transmission of monetary policy. 
This topic is examined below.
The risk-taking channel plays an important role in the transatlantic transmission of 
monetary policy  (see the supplementary information entitled “ Transatlantic transmis-
”). The monetary policy measures of sion of monetary policy and the role of risk appetite
the Federal Reserve cause persistent movements in euro area financial markets. Empiri-
cal analysis suggests that these developments are largely transmitted through the risk-
taking channel of globally active investors. The Eurosystem’s monetary policy also influ-
ences  investors’ risk appetite. However, its impact on  financial markets is US US
markedly weaker overall than the impact of  monetary policy on euro area financial US


Risk appetite in financial markets and monetary policy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 34markets. Moreover, investors’ risk appetite also influences movements in the exchange 
rate of the euro against other currencies. Ceteris paribus, a rise in domestic risk-free 
interest rates induced by the Eurosystem’s monetary policy leads to higher interest rate 
differentials vis-à-vis all other currency areas. This typically results in an appreciation of 
the nominal effective exchange rate of the euro.  However, the Eurosystem’s 
monetary policy impulse also dampens the risk appetite of global investors. This could 
explain why the euro appreciates less strongly, or not at all, against the  dollar, the US
Swiss franc and the yen. These currencies are either regarded as safe haven currencies 
or serve as financing currencies in speculative carry-trade transactions, which are 
increasingly unwound in times of heightened financial market tension.  The response 
of risk appetite thus tempers the appreciation pressure on the nominal effective euro. 19) 
 20) 
19 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022).
20 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2014), Hossfeld and MacDonald (2015).

Risk appetite in financial markets and monetary policy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 35Supplementary information
Transatlantic transmission of monetary policy and the 
role of risk appetite
On days when monetary policy decisions are announced, the prices of risky assets 
often move in the same direction in the euro area and the United States, which 
suggests that the risk appetite of globally active investors is influenced by monetary 
policy.  Against this background, the supplementary information provided here uses an 
event study to examine how the monetary policy of the Eurosystem and the  Federal US
Reserve  transmits transatlantically to financial markets, and what role investors’ ( )Fed
risk appetite plays in this context. To this end, monetary policy surprise components 
are identified in direct connection with the respective central bank’s monetary policy 
decisions. These monetary policy surprises are then used in an event study to empiri-
cally examine the response of key financial market indicators over time.
The risk appetite channel significantly contributes to the influence of US monetary 
policy on European financial markets  (Chart 2.5)  An approach that is well established .
in the literature is used to identify the Fed’s monetary policy surprises.  The results of 
the event study show that  monetary policy has a substantial impact on financial US
markets on both sides of the Atlantic via the risk appetite channel: an unexpected tight-
ening of 25 basis points by the  is accompanied in both currency areas by a persis-Fed
tent and economically significant risk-off movement in equity and bond markets. This is 
reflected in the fact that the impulse from the  dampens risk appetite in both Fed
currency areas, albeit with stronger effects in the domestic market. Furthermore, 
tighter  monetary policy causes a noticeable deprecation of the euro against the  US US
dollar. In addition to the widened interest rate differential between the United States 
and the euro area, the decline in investors’ risk appetite may contribute to the marked 
depreciation of the euro against the  dollar via safe haven effects. Accordingly, the US
reduced risk appetite of global investors bolsters demand for assets in safe haven 
currency areas like the United States, which intensifies the depreciation of the euro  1) 
 2) 1 See Hartwig (2025).

Risk appetite in financial markets and monetary policy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 36against the  dollar.  Moreover, the study results show a marked appreciation of the US
euro against the Canadian and the Australian dollar. This effect can also be linked to 
the decline in risk appetite, as these currencies are often targets for speculators.  As a 
result of these partially opposing movements against individual currencies, the depreci-
ation of the nominal effective euro is weaker than without this effect.
A monetary policy tightening by the Eurosystem reduces US investors’ risk appetite 
and triggers a moderate risk-off movement in US financial markets.  For this event 
study, the monetary policy surprise components of the  Governing Council ECB
presented in the main text are considered.  Compared with the effects of a monetary 
policy impulse in the United States on the euro area, the study finds that an unexpected 
 2) 
 3) 
 4) 
2 See Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2020) as well as Bauer et al. (2023). Principal component analysis is an estab-
lished statistical method for capturing the information within a dataset with a small number of ideally 
meaningful linear combinations of the principal components.
3 The first principal component is determined using the first eigenvector of the correlation matrix of the 13 
financial market indicators and the standardised data, which have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of 
one.
4 The corresponding indicators for  and global risk appetite explain 13% and 20%, respectively, of the US
common variation of individual indicators for the euro area. The Bloomberg and Goldman Sachs financial 
conditions indices explain only around 7% and 13% of the common variation, respectively.

Risk appetite in financial markets and monetary policy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 37monetary policy tightening by the  Governing Council only strongly delays, but ECB
hardly significantly increases, short to medium-term  interest rate expectations. US
Nonetheless, it does trigger a moderate risk-off movement in  equity and bond US
markets and also leads to a lasting reduction in  investors’ risk appetite. This demon-US
strates that the Eurosystem’s monetary policy influences  asset prices via the risk US
appetite channel, too. In addition, the euro appreciates less sharply against the  US
dollar than against a broad basket of currencies despite a widening of the euro-  US
dollar interest rate differential. This response is consistent with the risk appetite 
channel. In particular, a decline in risk appetite bolsters demand for  Treasuries, US
which gives the  dollar an additional boost. In effect, the risk appetite channel thus US
weakens the impulse from the Eurosystem’s monetary policy tightening on  US
Treasury yields and the appreciation of the euro against the  dollar.US

Risk appetite in financial markets and monetary policy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 383 Macroeconomic effects of monetary policy and risk 
appetite
Unlike in the United States, the Eurosystem’s risk-taking channel can amplify a 
monetary policy tightening impulse through higher risk premia and dampen it 
through exchange rate movements.  When risk appetite falls as a result of monetary 
policy tightening, risk premia and thus the financing costs of economic agents can rise 
above the risk-free level. Rising risk premia can also amplify losses in asset values. At 
the same time, the decline in risk appetite can weaken the effectiveness of the Eurosys-
tem’s monetary policy tightening via the exchange rate channel. In particular, diminish-
ing risk appetite can dampen demand for euro-denominated assets and counteract an 
appreciation of the euro. The question of which aspect dominates is ultimately an 
empirical one. Below, the role of the risk-taking channel for monetary policy transmis-
sion is examined using an estimated dynamic macro-financial model in order to 
quantify the effects for the euro area.
The estimation results show that tighter monetary policy reduces economic activity, 
the price level and investors’ risk appetite (see Chart 2.6)  The impact of monetary .
policy on risk premia plays a key role. Rising policy rates are accompanied by higher 
risk premia, as measured by the spreads on euro area BBB-rated corporate bonds. 
These increase the cost of capital beyond the rise in risk-free interest rates. At the same 
time, tighter monetary policy leads to an effective appreciation of the euro against the 
currencies of 18 trading partners. This reflects the fact that a wider interest rate differ-
ential causes foreign investors to increasingly seek out risk-free euro-denominated 
assets.  21) 
21 See Hartwig (2025). The model captures information from 20 variables for the goods, labour and financial 
markets, as well as indicators for the general price level, and is estimated on a monthly basis. Data that are 
only available on a quarterly basis, such as real gross domestic product  or the  deflator, are interpo- ( ) GDP GDP
lated at a monthly frequency as in Stock and Watson (2010).

Risk appetite in financial markets and monetary policy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 39The risk-taking channel increases the effectiveness of the Eurosystem’s monetary 
policy measures on economic activity and prices, as shown by a counterfactual 
analysis.  Using a counterfactual analysis, it is possible to isolate the impact of 
monetary policy measures. The analysis looks at how the variables behave under the 
assumption that monetary policy does not affect investors’ risk appetite.  The results 
show that real economic activity and domestic price levels would each be significantly 
less dampened than in a scenario in which monetary policy does affect investors’ risk 
appetite (grey dashed lines vs. black solid lines). In the absence of an effective risk-tak-
ing channel, monetary policy tightening causes the nominal effective exchange rate of 
the euro to appreciate more strongly owing to the effects outlined above. Taken in 
isolation, this would increase the dampening effect of tighter monetary policy on 
economic activity and prices. However, in this counterfactual scenario, risk premia 
 22) 
22 To this end, further non-monetary policy impulses are simulated using the method presented in Antolín-Díaz 
et al. (2021). The results show that risk appetite remains unchanged after the monetary policy impulse and 
that the two-year euro area  rate rises by 25 basis points in the month in which the Governing Council of theOIS
’s announcement takes place.ECB

Risk appetite in financial markets and monetary policy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 40would also rise less sharply and equity prices would not fall by as much, which would 
dampen the effectiveness of monetary policy via the cost of capital channel and asset 
price effects. Overall, the latter two channels outweigh the opposing effect of the 
exchange rate movement. The risk-taking channel thus strengthens the effectiveness 
of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy measures on economic activity and prices.

Risk appetite in financial markets and monetary policy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 414 Conclusions and outlook
Analysing investors’ risk appetite provides valuable information for assessing finan-
cial market developments and the effects of monetary policy.  This article looks at a 
new broad-based risk appetite index based on daily data for the euro area. The risk 
appetite index is time-varying, moves in line with the business cycle, and is co-deter-
mined by monetary policy. While it has generally moved in tandem with global financial 
market developments, it has shown significant responses to euro area-specific stress 
situations and monetary policy changes. 
The risk-taking channel, the tendency of monetary policy to influence investors’ risk 
appetite, has a significant impact on the effectiveness of the Eurosystem’s monetary 
policy on the macroeconomy and financial markets.  The risk-taking channel interacts 
with other monetary policy transmission channels. For example, it reinforces the restric-
tive effect of a tightening of Eurosystem monetary policy via the cost of capital and 
asset price channels by reducing investors’ risk appetite, but diminishes the restrictive 
impulse via the exchange rate channel. An empirical study of these effects shows that 
the former effects predominate, which means that the risk-taking channel overall 
strengthens the dampening impact of monetary policy tightening on economic activity 
and the general price level. 
The risk-taking channel contributes to the transmission of monetary policy impulses 
between currency areas, not only from the United States to the euro area, but 
also – to a lesser extent – from the euro area to the United States.  The event study 
outlined here complements existing literature on the relevance of the risk-taking 
channel for  monetary policy. It shows that a tightening of monetary policy by the US
Eurosystem also results in a swift and persistent risk-off movement in international 
financial markets and reduces risk appetite on both sides of the Atlantic. 
The analyses presented in this article suggest that, between July 2022 and Septem-
ber 2023, the dynamic economic environment weakened the dampening effect of 
monetary policy on risk appetite.  The results indicate that, taken in isolation, the 
monetary policy tightening cycle is likely to have dampened risk appetite among 
investors. However, in a dynamic economic environment, risk appetite has proved 

Risk appetite in financial markets and monetary policy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 42robust overall since autumn 2022, meaning that the restrictive monetary policy 
impulses were not intensified by rising risk premia in individual financial market 
segments. 
Looking ahead, the results could be extended along further dimensions.  For 
instance, the way in which the risk appetite index was designed does not allow us to 
quantify the extent to which monetary policy influences risk appetite via a change in 
risk aversion or a change in economic uncertainty. However, a distinction such as this is 
important for modelling the intertemporal consumption and investment decisions of 
economic agents.

Risk appetite in financial markets and monetary policy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 43List of references
Acharya, V. and H. Naqvi (2012), The seeds of a crisis: A theory of bank liquidity and risk 
taking over the business cycle , Journal of Financial Economics, 106(2), pp. 349‑366.
Adrian, T. and H. S. Shin (2010), Liquidity and leverage, Journal of Financial Intermedia-
tion, 19(3), pp. 418‑437.
Adrian, T., F. Duarte and T. Iyer (2023), The market price of risk and macro-financial 
dynamics , International Monetary Fund, Working Paper, 23199.
Antolín-Díaz, J., I. Petrella and J. F. Rubio-Ramírez (2021), Structural scenario analysis 
with SVARs , Journal of Monetary Economics, 117, pp. 798‑815.
Baele, L., G. Bekaert, K. Inghelbrecht and M. Wei (2020), Flights to safety , The Review of 
Financial Studies, 33(2), pp. 689‑746.
Baker, S. R., N. Bloom and S. J. Davis (2016), Measuring economic policy uncertainty , 
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(4), pp. 1593‑1636.
Bansal, R. and A. Yaron (2004), Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset 
pricing puzzles , Journal of Finance, 59(4), pp. 1481‑1509.
Bauer, M. D., B. S. Bernanke and E. Milstein (2023), Risk appetite and the risk-taking 
channel of monetary policy , Journal of Economic Perspectives, 37(1), pp. 77‑100.
Bauer, M. D. and E. T. Swanson (2023a), An alternative explanation for the "Fed informa-
tion effect" , American Economic Review, 113(3), pp. 664‑700.
Bauer, M. D. and E. T. Swanson (2023b), A reassessment of monetary policy surprises 
and high-frequency identification ,NBER  Macroeconomics Annual, 37(1), pp. 87‑155.
Bekaert, G., M. Hoerova and M. Lo Duca (2013), Risk, uncertainty and monetary policy , 
Journal of Monetary Economics, 60(7), pp. 771‑788.
Bekaert, G., E. C. Engstrom and N. R. Xu (2022), The time variation in risk appetite and 
uncertainty , Management Science, 68(6), pp. 3975‑4004.

Risk appetite in financial markets and monetary policy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 44Bernanke, B. S. and K. N. Kuttner (2005), What explains the stock market's reaction to 
Federal Reserve policy? , The Journal of Finance, 60(3), pp. 1221‑1257.
Bloom, N. (2009), The impact of uncertainty shocks , Econometrica, 77(3), pp. 623‑685.
Borio, C. and H. Zhu (2012), Capital regulation, risk-taking and monetary policy: A 
missing link in the transmission mechanism? , Journal of Financial Stability, 8(4), 
pp. 236‑251.
Brave, B. and R. A. Butters (2012), Diagnosing the financial system: Financial conditions 
and financial stress , International Journal of Central Banking, 8, pp. 191‑239.
Buch, C. M., S. Eickmeier and E. Prieto (2014), In search for yield? Survey-based evidence 
on bank risk taking , Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 43, pp. 12‑30.
Campbell, J. Y. and J. H. Cochrane (1999), By force of habit: A consumption‐based expla-
nation of aggregate stock market behavior , Journal of Political Economy, 107(2), 
pp. 205‑251.
Campbell, J. Y. and R. Sigalov (2022), Portfolio choice with sustainable spending: A 
model of reaching for yield , Journal of Financial Economics, 143(1), pp. 188‑206.
Cieslak, A. and A. Schrimpf (2019), Non-monetary news in central bank communication , 
Journal of International Economics, 118, pp. 293‑315.
Cochrane, J. H. (2017), Macro-finance , Review of Finance, 21(3), pp. 945‑985.
Cochrane, J. H. (2005), Asset pricing, Princeton University Press.
Datta, D., J. M. Londono, B. Sun, D. Beltran, T. Ferreira, M. Iacoviello, M. R. Jahan-Parvar, 
C. Li, M. Rodriguez and J. Rogers (2017), Taxonomy of global risk, uncertainty, and 
volatility measures , Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International 
Finance Discussion Paper, 1216.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023), Term structures in economic analysis , Monthly Report, 
January 2023.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022), The validity of interest parity in times of crisis , Monthly 
Report, October 2022.

Risk appetite in financial markets and monetary policy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 45Deutsche Bundesbank (2021), The impact of monetary policy depending on the debt 
situation in the non-financial private sector: Evidence for the euro area , Monthly 
Report, April 2021.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), The importance of bank profitability and bank capital for 
monetary policy , Monthly Report, January 2018.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2016), Stock market valuations – theoretical basics and enhanc-
ing the metrics , Monthly Report, April 2016.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2014), Exchange rates and financial stress , Monthly Report, 
July 2014.
Gai, P. and N. Vause (2006), Measuring investors’ risk appetite , International Journal of 
Central Banking, 2(1), pp. 167‑188.
Gertler, M. and P. Karadi (2015), Monetary policy surprises, credit costs, and economic 
activity , American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7(1), pp. 44‑76.
Haddad, V. and T. Muir (2021), Do intermediaries matter for aggregate asset prices? , 
The Journal of Finance, 76(6), pp. 2719-2761.
Hanson, S. G., D. O. Lucca and J. H. Wright (2021), Rate-amplifying demand and the 
excess sensitivity of long-term rates , The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 136(3), 
pp. 1719‑1781.
Hartwig, B. (2025), Risk appetite and monetary policy in the euro area, mimeo. 
He, Z. G. and A. Krishnamurthy (2013), Intermediary asset pricing , American Economic 
Review, 103(2), pp. 732‑770.
Hossfeld, O. and R. MacDonald (2015), Carry funding and safe haven currencies: A 
threshold regression approach , Journal of International Money and Finance, 59, 
pp. 185‑202.
Jiménez, G., S. Ongena, J.-L. Peydró and J. Saurina (2014), Hazardous times for monetary 
policy: What do twenty-three million bank loans say about the effects of monetary 
policy on credit risk-taking? , Econometrica, 82(2), pp. 463‑505.
Jurado, K., S. C. Ludvigson and S. Ng (2015), Measuring uncertainty , American Economic 
Review, 105(3), pp. 1177‑1216.

Risk appetite in financial markets and monetary policy
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report – January 2025 46Kalemli-Özcan, Ṣ. (2019), US monetary policy and international risk spillovers , National 
Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper, 26297.
Kashyap, A. K. and J. C. Stein (2023), Monetary policy when the central bank shapes 
financial-market sentiment , Journal of Economic Perspectives, 37(1), pp. 53‑76.
Kerssenfischer, M. (2022), Information effects of euro area monetary policy , Economics 
Letters, 216, 110570.
Ludvigson, S. C., S. Ma and S. Ng (2021), Uncertainty and business cycles: Exogenous 
impulse or endogenous response?,  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 13
(4), pp. 369‑410.
Miranda-Agrippino, S. and H. Rey (2020), U.S. Monetary policy and the global financial 
cycle , The Review of Economic Studies, 87(6), pp. 2754‑2776.
Pflueger, C., E. Siriwardane and A. Sunderam (2020), Financial market risk perceptions 
and the macroeconomy , The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135(3), pp. 1443‑1491.
Romer, C. D. and D. H. Romer (2000), Federal Reserve information and the behavior of 
interest rates , American Economic Review, 90(3), pp. 429‑457.
Stock, J. and M. Watson (2010), Monthly estimates of real GDP /GDP : Research 
memorandum , Manuscript, Harvard University and Princeton University.

Statistical  
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
02 
1•  2 January 5

Contents
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5•
2. External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5•
3. General economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8•
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10•
3. Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16•
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche 
Bundes  bank) in Germany  .............................................................................................  20•
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24•
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26•
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28•
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30•
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32•
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34•
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36•
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36•
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38•
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38•
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39•
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
2•02   2 5 January

V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42•
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42•
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest  ....................................................................  43•
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43•
3. Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43•
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48•
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49•
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50•
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51•
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52•
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52•
5. Yields on German securities  .........................................................................................  53•
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53•
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54•
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55•
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56•
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57•
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  .. 58•
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  ........................................................................................................  58•
3. General government: budgetary development  .............................................................  59•
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59•
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60•
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
02 
3• 25 January

7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61•
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ....... 61•
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62•
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62•
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63•
12. Maastricht debt by creditor  .........................................................................................  63•
13. Maastricht debt by instrument .....................................................................................  64•
14. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category  ............................  65•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  66•
2. Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  67•
3. Orders received by industry  .........................................................................................  68•
4. Orders received by construction  ..................................................................................  69•
5. Retail trade turnover  ....................................................................................................  69•
6. Labour market  .............................................................................................................  70•
7. Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  71•
8. Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  72•
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  72•
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  73•
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  74•
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  75•
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  76•
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  77•
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ................................  78•
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............  78•
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  79•
7. External position of the Bundesbank ............................................................................  80•
8. External positions of enterprises  ..................................................................................  81•
9. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  82•
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage of 
Economic   and Monetary Union  ...................................................................................  82•
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  83•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
4•02   2 5 January

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
5•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
M3 3
M1 M23-month
moving average
(centred)MFI lending,
totalMFI lending to
enterprises
and
householdsMonetary
capital
formation  4 €STR  5,6Yield on Euro-
pean govern-
ment bonds
outstanding  7
Period Annual percentage change % p.a. as a monthly average
2023 Apr. – 5.8 0.4 1.3 1.4 1.4 2.4 2.6 2.90 3.0
May – 7.0 – 0.1 1.0 0.9 0.9 2.3 3.4 3.08 3.0
June – 8.0 – 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.4 1.7 3.6 3.24 3.0
July – 9.1 – 1.4 – 0.3 – 0.4 0.1 1.3 4.1 3.40 3.1
Aug. – 10.4 – 2.3 – 1.3 – 0.9 – 0.1 0.7 4.5 3.64 3.2
Sep. – 10.0 – 2.2 – 1.2 – 1.1 – 0.4 0.4 5.1 3.75 3.3
Oct. – 10.0 – 2.2 – 1.0 – 1.0 – 0.5 0.4 5.6 3.90 3.5
Nov. – 9.6 – 1.9 – 0.9 – 0.6 – 0.7 0.2 5.3 3.90 3.3
Dec. – 8.6 – 1.0 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.4 0.4 4.9 3.90 2.7
2024 Jan. – 8.6 – 1.1 0.1 0.2 – 0.4 0.4 5.4 3.90 2.8
Feb. – 7.7 – 0.6 0.4 0.5 – 0.3 0.8 5.1 3.91 2.9
Mar. – 6.7 – 0.3 0.9 0.9 – 0.2 0.8 5.2 3.91 2.9
Apr. – 5.9 0.1 1.4 1.3 0.0 0.8 4.9 3.91 3.0
May – 5.0 0.6 1.6 1.7 – 0.1 0.5 4.5 3.91 3.0
June – 3.5 1.2 2.2 2.1 0.2 0.9 4.5 3.75 3.1
July – 3.0 1.2 2.4 2.5 0.3 0.9 4.1 3.66 3.0
Aug. – 2.0 1.7 2.9 2.8 0.6 1.2 4.0 3.66 2.8
Sep. – 1.3 2.0 3.2 3.2 0.6 1.3 3.9 3.56 2.7
Oct. 0.2 2.4 3.4 3.5 0.7 1.4 3.7 3.34 2.8
Nov. 1.5 2.9 3.8 ... 0.7 1.3 3.6 3.16 2.9
Dec. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3.06 2.7
1 Source: ECB.  2 Seasonally adjusted.  3 Excluding money market fund shares/units,
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by
non-euro area residents.  4 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs.  5 EuroShort-Term Rate.  6 See also footnotes to Table VI.3, p. 43●. 7 GDP-weighted yield on
ten-year government bonds. Countries included: DE, FR, NL, BE, AT, FI, IE, PT, ES, IT,
GR, SK, CY, SI.
2. External transactions and positions *
Selected items of the euro area balance of payments  r Euro exchange rates  1
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate  3
Balanceof which:
Goods BalanceDirect
investmentPortfolio
investmentFinancial
derivatives  2Other
investmentReserve
assetsReference
rate 
vis-á-vis the
US dollar Nominal Real  4
Period € million EUR 1 = USD ... Q1 1999 = 100
2023 Apr. + 9,396 + 7,297 + 6,098 –28,977 +71,035 – 2,589 –31,526 – 1,845 1.0968 98.4 94.2
May – 9,036 +16,310 –11,378 –50,363 +49,072 + 6,722 –18,184 + 1,375 1.0868 98.0 93.6
June +33,296 +31,650 +70,490 +83,857 –33,322 –10,752 +28,315 + 2,393 1.0840 98.2 93.8
July +25,397 +21,385 +36,687 –36,897 +56,394 – 7,715 +24,467 + 438 1.1058 99.2 95.0
Aug. +26,663 +22,709 +29,251 + 7,447 – 2,950 + 3,493 +19,938 + 1,325 1.0909 99.0 95.1
Sep. +34,588 +29,324 +26,505 +11,088 –64,207 + 3,512 +80,008 – 3,897 1.0684 98.5 94.7
Oct. +17,664 +17,414 +36,185 – 5,697 + 5,475 +20,075 +12,605 + 3,727 1.0563 98.0 94.1
Nov. +36,330 +34,658 +58,514 + 7,285 +21,209 + 924 +27,577 + 1,519 1.0808 98.7 94.6
Dec. +39,705 +30,666 +17,794 –24,537 –72,984 + 924 +113,237 + 1,153 1.0903 98.2 93.9
2024 Jan. +26,514 +27,195 +28,126 +12,659 –22,398 +13,410 +23,632 + 822 1.0905 98.4 94.4
Feb. +32,898 +37,436 +17,182 +51,943 –17,094 +11,845 –30,373 + 861 1.0795 98.1 94.1
Mar. +37,671 +37,057 +69,160 +31,316 +13,111 –11,797 +37,058 – 528 1.0872 98.8 94.8
Apr. +40,072 +29,727 +31,416 +45,878 –23,670 +16,833 – 8,426 + 802 1.0728 98.6 94.5
May + 9,398 +30,840 + 9,125 +15,578 – 8,347 – 2,227 + 2,486 + 1,634 1.0812 98.9 94.8
June +56,284 +36,828 +88,309 +11,668 –49,031 + 2,282 +122,089 + 1,302 1.0759 98.5 94.5
July +38,745 +35,519 +49,655 +26,291 – 8,045 – 2,228 +36,768 – 3,131 1.0844 99.0 p 95.1
Aug. +25,377 +18,781 +24,633 – 7,687 –23,709 – 7,726 +66,733 – 2,978 1.1012 99.0 p 95.0
Sep. +42,060 +28,967 +63,736 – 542 –19,104 + 1,631 +79,597 + 2,155 1.1106 98.8 p 94.8
Oct. +31,980 +32,701 +22,953 – 2,262 +23,900 +20,110 –18,561 – 234 1.0904 98.2 p 94.3
Nov. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0630 97.5 p 93.6
Dec. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0479 96.9 p 92.9
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund's Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Monthly averages, see also Tables
XII. 9 and 11, pp. 82●/ 83●.  2 Including employee stock options.  3 Bundesbank cal-culation. Vis-á-vis the currencies of the extended EER group of tranding partners (fixed
composition).  4 Based on consumer price indices.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
6•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
3. General economic indicators
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Croatia Latvia
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
2022 3.5 4.2 1.4 0.1 0.8 2.6 5.8 8.6 4.7 7.3 1.8
2023 0.4 1.2 –0.3 –3.0 –1.2 0.9 2.3 –5.5 0.7 3.3 1.7
2024 ... ... –0.2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
2023 Q2 0.6 1.2 –0.4 –2.4 –0.8 0.8 3.4 –3.9 0.2 3.9 –0.7
Q3 –0.0 0.6 –0.7 –2.8 –2.5 0.5 2.0 –8.4 0.1 2.0 3.6
Q4 0.1 0.6 –0.4 –1.9 –1.8 1.0 2.3 –9.1 0.2 5.3 0.3
2024 Q1 0.4 0.7 –0.8 –2.2 –1.8 1.2 1.6 –4.8 0.3 4.0 0.8
Q2 0.5 1.0 0.1 –0.7 –1.1 0.5 2.6 –3.2 0.9 3.5 –0.5
Q3 0.9 1.2 0.1 –0.7 0.8 1.7 2.5 2.9 0.8 3.9 –1.6
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
2021 9.0 16.8 4.6 12.8 4.3 5.5 10.4 30.4 12.3 6.3 6.6
2022 1.7 –0.5 –0.3 –2.1 4.0 –0.0 2.5 12.3 0.3 1.7 0.8
2023 –1.7 –5.6 –1.9 –9.0 –2.5 0.8 2.3 –2.5 –2.1 –0.1 –4.3
2023 Q2 –0.4 –4.3 –0.4 –12.9 –3.8 1.4 1.2 10.3 –3.5 0.0 –7.4
Q3 –3.6 –6.9 –3.5 –10.6 –3.0 0.7 –0.2 –11.3 –2.5 –0.4 –6.0
Q4 –3.6 –8.1 –4.5 –4.3 –3.4 2.0 6.0 –13.1 –1.5 1.6 0.4
2024 Q1 –4.6 –7.1 –5.6 –7.0 –3.3 0.5 3.7 –18.7 –3.5 –3.9 –0.3
Q2 –3.9 –4.7 –5.1 –3.1 –3.2 –0.9 9.7 –12.9 –3.0 –4.6 –4.6
Q3 –1.6 0.1 p–4.4 –4.4 2.8 –0.5 5.8 5.2 –3.5 0.3 –0.2
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
2022 82.2 79.1 85.2 71.7 81.0 81.8 75.9 79.8 79.0 77.0 75.0
2023 80.7 75.8 83.4 67.3 76.6 81.2 75.2 ... 77.5 77.2 72.9
2024 78.2 74.5 78.8 65.5 74.6 80.9 77.7 ... 75.5 75.3 72.2
2023 Q3 80.2 75.1 82.9 62.6 77.4 80.6 76.3 ... 77.4 78.5 72.7
Q4 79.6 73.9 81.9 64.6 73.7 81.3 75.9 ... 76.5 74.6 72.3
2024 Q1 79.2 74.0 81.3 65.6 73.3 80.9 73.4 ... 75.5 75.9 71.4
Q2 78.9 74.5 80.2 65.8 74.6 80.7 81.1 ... 76.0 74.3 73.0
Q3 77.7 74.4 77.4 64.9 76.4 81.6 78.2 ... 75.5 73.8 72.1
Q4 76.9 75.2 76.3 65.6 74.1 80.2 78.0 ... 75.1 77.1 72.4
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
2022 6.7 e 5.5 p 3.1 e 5.6 e 6.8 e 7.3 e 12.5 e 4.5 e 8.1 e 6.7 e 6.9
2023 6.6 e 5.5 p 3.0 e 6.4 e 7.2 e 7.3 e 11.1 e 4.3 e 7.7 e 6.1 e 6.5
2024 ... ... ... e 7.5 ... ... ... e 4.3 ... ... ...
2024 July 6.4 5.6 3.5 7.9 8.6 7.5 9.6 4.5 6.3 4.9 6.8
Aug. 6.3 5.7 3.4 7.7 8.3 7.5 9.4 4.2 6.1 4.8 6.9
Sep. 6.3 5.8 3.4 8.1 8.7 7.5 9.4 4.2 6.0 4.8 6.8
Oct. 6.3 5.8 3.4 7.5 8.9 7.6 9.8 4.2 5.8 4.6 6.8
Nov. 6.3 5.8 3.4 7.5 8.9 7.7 9.6 4.1 5.7 4.5 6.8
Dec. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4.2 ... ... ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2022 8.4 10.3 8.7 19.4 7.2 5.9 9.3 8.1 8.7 10.7 17.2
2023 5 5.4 2.3 6.0 9.1 4.3 5.7 4.2 5.2 5.9 8.4 9.1
2024 2.4 4.3 2.5 3.7 1.0 2.3 3.0 1.3 1.1 4.0 1.3
2024 July 2.6 5.4 2.6 3.5 0.5 2.7 3.0 1.5 1.6 3.3 0.8
Aug. 2.2 4.3 2.0 3.4 1.1 2.2 3.2 1.1 1.2 3.0 0.9
Sep. 1.7 4.3 1.8 3.2 1.0 1.4 3.1 0.0 0.7 3.1 1.6
Oct. 2.0 4.5 2.4 4.5 1.5 1.6 3.1 0.1 1.0 3.6 2.1
Nov. 2.2 4.8 2.4 3.8 1.7 1.7 3.0 0.5 1.5 4.0 2.3
Dec. 2.4 4.4 2.8 4.1 1.6 1.8 2.9 1.0 1.4 4.5 3.4
General government financial balance 6
As a percentage of GDP
2022 –3.5 –3.6 –2.1 –1.1 –0.2 –4.7 –2.5 1.7 –8.1 0.1 –4.9
2023 –3.6 –4.2 –2.6 –2.8 –3.0 –5.5 –1.3 1.5 –7.2 –0.9 –2.4
2024 ... ... –2.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
General government debt 6
As a percentage of GDP
2021 93.8 108.4 68.1 18.4 73.2 112.7 197.3 52.6 145.7 78.2 45.9
2022 89.5 102.6 65.0 19.1 74.0 111.2 177.0 43.1 138.3 68.5 44.4
2023 87.4 103.1 62.9 20.2 77.1 109.9 163.9 43.3 134.8 61.8 45.0
Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, European Central Bank, Federal Statistical
Office, Bundesbank calculations. Latest data are partly based on press reports and areprovisional.  1 Euro area: quarterly data seasonally and calendar adjusted.  2 Manu-
facturing, mining and energy: adjusted for working-day variations.  3 Manufacturing:

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
7•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
2.5 1.4 4.3 5.0 5.3 7.0 0.4 2.7 6.2 7.4 2022
0.3 –1.1 6.7 0.1 –1.0 2.5 1.4 2.1 2.7 2.6 2023
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2024
1.5 –0.5 6.0 –0.3 –1.6 2.5 1.6 2.2 2.3 2.4 2023 Q2
1.2 –2.0 7.4 –0.7 –2.2 2.0 1.8 1.9 1.7 2.4 Q3
0.4 –0.7 6.0 –0.5 –2.6 2.8 2.0 2.7 2.3 2.5 Q4
2.9 –0.7 8.1 –0.6 –1.7 1.4 3.3 2.2 2.8 3.6 2024 Q1
1.7 0.0 8.0 0.8 –1.2 1.7 2.0 0.7 3.5 3.7 Q2
2.5 1.1 4.9 1.7 –0.6 1.8 1.2 1.4 3.4 3.9 Q3
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
20.1 8.3 –0.9 4.0 11.0 3.9 10.0 9.9 7.8 6.0 2021
9.3 –3.6 1.5 2.6 5.9 0.6 –4.1 2.0 2.7 2.6 2022
–5.2 –4.2 7.1 –0.0 –0.3 –3.1 4.1 –4.9 –1.7 2.3 2023
0.1 –3.9 7.6 –0.6 0.2 –5.2 3.3 –3.3 –3.0 1.9 2023 Q2
–5.5 –4.5 1.8 –0.7 –0.9 –4.9 1.8 –8.9 –3.1 2.8 Q3
–3.2 –2.1 4.2 –1.8 –2.4 –3.5 8.3 –4.1 –1.1 4.0 Q4
–0.8 –4.2 –2.2 –2.5 –4.8 1.2 –4.5 –3.1 1.1 4.1 2024 Q1
0.2 –0.2 4.2 –2.3 –4.3 1.0 –0.8 –3.1 –0.1 4.6 Q2
3.7 –3.4 2.5 –1.4 –2.8 –0.8 2.9 1.0 –0.5 1.4 Q3
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
77.8 80.7 64.7 83.7 87.7 81.9 83.3 84.9 78.7 58.2 2022
68.4 73.1 68.1 81.9 85.3 81.7 82.1 83.1 76.9 61.6 2023
71.0 76.4 78.7 78.3 82.8 81.2 79.8 81.0 77.6 63.5 2024
68.0 72.0 69.4 81.3 84.7 80.9 83.0 82.8 76.2 62.9 2023 Q3
68.5 70.5 84.1 80.9 83.3 80.9 81.0 82.4 77.8 63.4 Q4
70.6 74.8 75.6 78.8 84.0 81.0 80.1 80.6 77.2 65.1 2024 Q1
70.3 75.3 76.4 79.6 83.3 81.2 77.6 80.8 77.7 63.5 Q2
71.4 76.0 81.4 77.7 81.7 81.3 81.3 81.6 77.9 62.8 Q3
71.5 79.5 81.4 77.0 82.3 81.3 80.3 81.1 77.5 62.5 Q4
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
e 5.9 e 4.6 e 3.5 e 3.6 e 4.8 e 6.2 e 6.2 e 4.0 e 13.0 e 6.3 2022
e 6.9 e 5.3 e 3.5 e 3.5 e 5.1 e 6.5 e 5.9 e 3.7 e 12.2 e 5.9 2023
... ... ... ... ... e 6.4 ... ... ... ... 2024
7.5 6.1 3.0 3.6 5.2 6.5 5.3 4.0 11.4 4.8 2024 July
7.4 6.1 3.1 3.7 5.3 6.4 5.3 4.2 11.3 4.7 Aug.
7.5 6.1 3.1 3.7 5.6 6.6 5.2 4.6 11.2 4.5 Sep.
6.9 6.2 3.0 3.7 5.6 6.6 5.3 4.9 11.2 4.5 Oct.
6.9 6.3 3.0 3.7 5.0 6.7 5.3 5.2 11.2 4.4 Nov.
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Dec.
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
18.9 8.2 6.1 11.6 8.6 8.1 12.1 9.3 8.3 8.1 2022
8.7 2.9 5.6 4.1 7.7 5.3 11.0 7.2 3.4 3.9 2023
0.9 2.3 2.4 3.2 2.9 2.7 3.2 2.0 2.9 2.3 2024
1.1 2.7 2.3 3.5 2.9 2.7 3.0 1.4 2.9 2.4 2024 July
0.8 1.7 2.4 3.3 2.4 1.8 3.2 1.1 2.4 2.2 Aug.
0.4 0.8 2.1 3.3 1.8 2.6 2.9 0.7 1.7 1.6 Sep.
0.1 0.9 2.4 3.3 1.8 2.6 3.5 0.0 1.8 1.6 Oct.
1.1 1.1 2.1 3.8 1.9 2.7 3.6 1.6 2.4 2.2 Nov.
1.9 1.6 1.8 3.9 2.1 3.1 3.2 2.0 2.8 3.1 Dec.
General government financial balance 6
As a percentage of GDP
–0.7 0.2 –5.2 0.0 –3.3 –0.3 –1.7 –3.0 –4.6 2.6 2022
–0.7 –0.7 –4.5 –0.4 –2.6 1.2 –5.2 –2.6 –3.5 2.0 2023
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2024
General government debt 6
As a percentage of GDP
43.3 24.4 49.6 50.4 82.4 123.9 60.2 74.8 115.7 96.5 2021
38.1 24.6 49.4 48.3 78.4 111.2 57.7 72.7 109.5 81.0 2022
37.3 25.5 47.4 45.1 78.6 97.9 56.1 68.4 105.1 73.6 2023
quarterly data seasonally adjusted. Data collection at the beginning of the quarter.
4 Monthly data seasonally adjusted.  5 Including Croatia from 2023 onwards.6 According to Maastricht Treaty definition.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
8•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts *
a) Euro area 1
€ billion
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2023 Apr. – 5.6 28.0 29.5 –33.5 –29.2 –19.0 –29.2 –10.2 11.0 9.4 1.4 4.3 –4.1
May – 0.2 45.5 33.2 –45.7 –50.0 4.3 22.1 17.8 30.8 –0.4 2.4 27.5 1.3
June 5.2 –9.2 –12.3 14.3 21.1 109.5 13.5 –96.1 36.5 1.2 2.8 26.2 6.3
July –45.6 6.9 5.2 –52.5 –52.1 37.0 109.0 72.0 30.6 0.9 2.9 19.4 7.5
Aug. –56.2 –66.9 –12.2 10.8 13.5 31.4 61.8 30.4 20.9 –2.3 4.0 9.6 9.6
Sep. 37.0 33.5 –1.6 3.5 2.6 62.7 –106.7 –169.4 44.8 15.3 5.0 9.9 14.6
Oct. –33.7 6.0 –10.4 –39.8 –39.3 54.6 49.4 –5.2 22.0 –9.3 4.7 27.1 –0.5
Nov. 38.1 46.9 –1.1 –8.8 –4.7 59.0 51.3 –7.7 19.1 –4.7 5.6 24.5 –6.4
Dec. –57.9 –47.2 2.7 –10.7 –19.6 26.4 –100.1 –126.5 27.4 12.5 5.9 7.4 1.6
2024 Jan. – 8.7 –1.6 25.7 –7.1 –6.9 118.0 111.8 –6.2 76.0 –3.6 7.0 60.8 11.9
Feb. 38.7 38.2 6.8 0.5 11.0 –15.9 98.2 114.1 4.0 0.8 4.8 14.7 –16.3
Mar. 55.5 47.9 4.0 7.5 7.8 63.5 96.0 32.6 36.7 5.0 3.0 35.2 –6.5
Apr. 32.9 24.1 1.3 8.8 4.7 47.4 9.2 –38.2 –5.3 –7.4 2.5 18.6 –19.0
May –24.1 –6.3 –1.1 –17.8 –15.0 41.2 71.3 30.1 6.2 2.2 1.7 –0.5 2.7
June 68.2 51.0 –5.4 17.2 14.3 59.1 –20.7 –79.8 35.6 3.8 1.1 3.9 26.9
July –16.8 14.3 –5.9 –31.2 –26.4 65.5 47.1 –18.5 5.7 –8.5 1.1 5.4 7.8
Aug. – 6.1 –15.8 –4.4 9.7 9.8 53.5 61.5 8.1 17.0 –2.7 0.9 14.5 4.3
Sep. 45.0 47.7 2.1 –2.7 –0.4 56.3 140.7 84.4 41.1 12.1 1.8 12.2 14.9
Oct. – 4.4 14.7 8.5 –19.0 –26.4 43.0 –30.2 –73.2 9.5 –7.8 1.3 8.7 7.3
Nov. 32.1 35.2 10.9 –3.1 –3.0 10.8 135.7 124.9 7.7 5.2 0.3 9.7 –7.5
b) German contribution
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2023 Apr. – 3.7 13.0 1.2 –16.7 –20.2 62.7 –15.2 –77.9 5.0 2.0 1.5 –3.0 4.5
May 5.0 11.3 –1.3 –6.3 –4.7 9.6 16.5 6.9 16.9 2.7 2.2 6.1 5.8
June 1.5 –1.9 4.1 3.4 5.4 7.6 –6.6 –14.3 9.7 –0.9 2.7 –0.3 8.2
July 5.1 6.8 –1.1 –1.7 –4.7 34.0 8.3 –25.7 24.9 –0.3 3.0 10.2 12.0
Aug. – 6.8 –5.0 –6.1 –1.8 0.3 25.7 –5.3 –31.0 6.6 –2.7 2.7 0.2 6.4
Sep. – 8.2 1.7 0.8 –9.9 –13.3 – 0.1 –2.8 –2.7 21.1 0.1 2.9 11.6 6.4
Oct. – 2.0 0.1 –0.2 –2.1 –5.2 16.2 4.9 –11.3 11.8 –0.1 3.0 5.9 3.0
Nov. 12.2 13.1 –1.1 –0.8 1.8 13.7 –3.4 –17.1 10.6 3.7 3.4 1.0 2.4
Dec. –18.0 –11.1 2.5 –6.9 –5.1 –17.4 –10.6 6.8 8.8 3.2 2.5 1.7 1.4
2024 Jan. 11.1 2.0 –0.5 9.1 6.7 74.5 20.7 –53.7 –1.8 –0.1 2.5 12.7 –17.0
Feb. 10.6 20.2 6.8 –9.6 –7.6 –17.0 40.0 57.1 –6.9 –1.6 2.4 7.7 –15.3
Mar. 8.3 4.3 0.5 4.0 2.0 6.6 4.2 –2.4 –5.3 1.7 1.7 2.4 –11.1
Apr. –13.5 –3.7 –3.9 –9.8 –13.1 41.3 4.2 –37.1 16.0 2.0 0.9 11.2 1.9
May 5.4 14.6 5.7 –9.2 –7.8 17.6 35.0 17.4 19.8 2.7 0.5 5.5 11.1
June 4.2 –4.1 –2.7 8.3 5.1 –24.4 –15.4 9.0 19.8 –0.7 0.4 –2.0 22.1
July 11.2 8.3 –1.5 2.8 2.5 57.0 –2.9 –59.9 3.3 –0.2 0.1 –2.8 6.1
Aug. – 1.6 7.5 –1.6 –9.1 –7.9 10.9 16.8 5.9 10.0 –0.4 0.1 2.1 8.3
Sep. 17.1 9.3 0.8 7.8 5.1 – 8.3 47.4 55.6 8.8 0.1 0.8 –0.4 8.3
Oct. –11.4 4.1 1.0 –15.5 –18.3 28.4 –5.0 –33.4 4.4 –0.4 0.7 4.3 –0.3
Nov. 21.4 24.5 9.8 –3.1 –2.4 13.6 28.8 15.2 –5.8 12.5 –0.7 –7.4 –10.2
* The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also the "Notes on the figures" in the "Explanatory notes" of the
Statistical Series Banking Statistics).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Excluding MFIs' portfolios.  3 Afterdeduction of inter-MFI participations.  4 Including the counterparts of monetary
liabilities of central governments.  5 Including the monetary liabilities of central
governments (Post Office, Treasury).  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.  7 Paper held
by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.  8 Less German MFIs' holdings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
9•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
a) Euro area 1
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2
Money stock M1
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments Total  4of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue Total Total TotalCurrency
in circu-
lationOvernight
deposits  5Deposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 years  5Deposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  5,6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  2,7,8Debt secur-
ities with
maturities
of up to
2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)
(net)  2,7 Period
–27.2 –18.4 0.0 8.9 –18.0 –52.1 4.1 –56.3 45.6 –11.4 6.7 21.2 0.3 2023 Apr.
–104.4 88.0 0.0 –30.4 –44.9 –94.4 1.7 –96.1 52.9 – 3.5 29.6 1.5 4.2 May
24.5 52.1 0.0 6.5 22.3 –61.0 3.1 –64.1 94.5 –11.2 –11.2 –6.2 – 3.7 June
–29.1 4.5 0.0 0.2 –28.4 –91.3 3.0 –94.4 73.5 –10.6 4.1 10.6 – 0.9 July
–20.0 5.3 0.0 –43.4 –45.1 –102.0 –7.6 –94.4 81.2 –24.3 4.4 8.4 0.8 Aug.
35.1 –16.1 0.0 46.5 44.6 –11.6 –3.1 – 8.5 79.8 –23.6 – 5.8 –0.7 – 2.1 Sep.
–28.5 63.1 0.0 –44.9 –87.9 –169.1 –4.4 –164.8 102.9 –21.7 25.2 18.8 8.4 Oct.
–48.4 42.9 0.0 76.3 54.4 18.3 –2.9 21.3 48.8 –12.7 22.3 16.9 –10.1 Nov.
14.4 –224.8 0.0 166.9 166.2 71.7 13.8 57.9 75.8 18.7 –27.1 14.4 – 2.1 Dec.
18.9 136.1 0.0 –132.4 –181.4 –238.0 –16.9 –221.1 61.0 – 4.4 27.2 30.8 1.7 2024 Jan.
9.1 6.5 0.0 1.2 15.2 –31.0 –0.7 –30.3 55.8 – 9.6 5.2 –11.4 – 5.6 Feb.
–26.8 –25.0 0.0 121.7 103.9 58.1 5.4 52.7 46.7 – 0.8 23.9 15.7 – 9.4 Mar.
23.9 49.5 0.0 26.4 –23.5 –18.4 2.5 –20.8 –1.8 – 3.3 6.5 22.6 6.4 Apr.
–24.3 17.1 0.0 22.7 48.7 32.5 2.8 29.6 10.2 6.0 – 3.5 –20.7 – 6.3 May
4.1 –76.7 0.0 140.8 150.3 139.8 7.0 132.9 12.3 – 1.8 8.5 10.1 – 4.6 June
–27.3 95.7 0.0 – 9.8 –69.4 –80.9 4.1 –85.0 17.5 – 5.9 24.6 21.0 – 1.6 July
34.6 –99.8 0.0 69.2 57.2 39.9 –1.6 41.4 11.8 5.6 30.0 14.6 – 6.3 Aug.
– 3.6 24.6 0.0 47.6 53.4 30.1 –1.4 31.5 36.0 –12.7 –23.8 –0.0 9.7 Sep.
24.3 9.3 0.0 10.9 –27.2 –11.9 –0.1 –11.8 –7.8 – 7.5 4.1 18.5 0.3 Oct.
–42.3 –95.7 0.0 166.0 167.9 185.8 3.9 181.9 –21.0 3.1 6.5 16.2 –17.5 Nov.
b) German contribution
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10
of which: Components of the money stock
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments TotalIntra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9,11Currency
in circu-
lation TotalOvernight
depositsDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  7,8maturities
with
maturities
of up to 2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)(net)  7 Period
– 39.0 86.7 1.9 0.7 6.3 – 11.7 25.3 – 10.2 0.7 0.2 1.9 2023 Apr.
– 11.8 2.8 2.6 0.9 6.7 – 6.2 18.4 – 10.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 5.1 May
– 9.8 8.4 1.7 1.1 0.8 – 29.2 36.7 – 10.0 – 0.3 – 0.0 3.6 June
– 6.4 20.0 1.6 1.3 0.7 – 21.8 31.5 – 10.3 0.3 0.3 0.8 July
7.4 – 1.5 2.9 – 1.9 6.4 – 21.1 30.4 – 11.2 1.1 0.1 7.1 Aug.
– 11.6 – 12.1 3.6 – 1.7 – 5.7 – 13.3 17.8 – 8.6 – 1.0 0.1 – 0.7 Sep.
– 2.4 2.9 1.5 – 0.5 1.9 – 31.2 38.8 – 9.4 0.8 – 0.1 3.0 Oct.
– 9.5 13.9 1.1 – 0.4 11.1 9.4 11.7 – 10.5 1.1 0.1 – 0.8 Nov.
7.7 – 62.1 2.4 2.8 10.2 – 6.6 25.1 – 5.0 – 1.2 0.1 – 2.2 Dec.
– 6.7 108.3 – 7.4 3.7 – 14.3 – 47.5 37.6 – 9.1 3.0 0.1 1.4 2024 Jan.
– 2.3 0.0 2.4 – 0.6 2.7 – 18.3 27.1 – 7.4 1.0 0.0 0.3 Feb.
2.0 – 2.1 2.9 0.7 20.3 2.8 24.9 – 5.8 – 1.5 0.2 – 0.3 Mar.
– 2.9 23.7 1.8 1.5 – 9.1 – 4.4 6.1 – 5.5 – 0.3 0.2 – 5.2 Apr.
3.5 – 26.8 2.4 0.4 26.5 27.6 5.0 – 4.1 – 0.3 0.1 – 1.8 May
– 4.3 – 39.8 1.6 1.7 4.1 1.3 2.3 – 4.5 0.8 0.1 4.2 June
– 6.1 75.8 2.9 1.7 – 4.8 – 7.3 9.0 – 4.2 0.7 0.2 – 3.3 July
6.8 – 40.3 4.2 – 1.1 32.8 22.9 9.3 – 2.9 1.7 0.4 1.5 Aug.
– 5.6 – 6.9 3.9 – 0.9 12.5 6.7 8.9 – 2.7 – 2.7 0.3 2.0 Sep.
3.3 15.1 3.0 – 0.3 – 5.8 4.8 – 3.5 – 2.5 – 0.4 0.1 – 4.3 Oct.
– 6.1 4.9 2.1 1.0 42.0 57.3 – 11.9 – 1.8 – 2.6 – 0.2 1.2 Nov.
of paper issued by euro area MFIs.  9 Including national banknotes still in circulation.
10 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates should on no
account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are therefore not
comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.  11 Thedifference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank
and the amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the
Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
10•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
End of
monthTotal
assets or
liabilities Total Total LoansDebt
securities  2Shares and
other
equities Total LoansDebt
securities  3 
 
Claims
on non-
euro area
residentsOther
assets
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2022 Oct. 34,516.0 21,891.0 15,552.2 13,190.1 1,532.9 829.3 6,338.8 995.2 5,343.6 7,334.8 5,290.1
Nov. 34,202.1 22,011.9 15,627.4 13,228.2 1,559.0 840.1 6,384.5 990.3 5,394.2 7,206.6 4,983.6
Dec. 33,845.6 21,792.8 15,515.3 13,123.9 1,556.1 835.4 6,277.5 999.1 5,278.4 6,873.6 5,179.2
2023 Jan. 33,803.8 21,884.1 15,553.5 13,173.2 1,544.7 835.6 6,330.6 1,000.3 5,330.3 6,984.1 4,935.6
Feb. 34,092.1 21,862.9 15,545.5 13,159.9 1,541.1 844.6 6,317.4 991.3 5,326.2 7,001.8 5,227.3
Mar. 33,938.9 21,919.6 15,573.6 13,173.8 1,552.4 847.4 6,346.0 995.4 5,350.6 7,107.2 4,912.1
Apr. 33,942.3 21,909.0 15,601.1 13,168.5 1,566.5 866.2 6,307.9 991.1 5,316.8 7,038.5 4,994.8
May 34,127.4 21,919.7 15,651.1 13,186.0 1,595.7 869.4 6,268.7 995.4 5,273.2 7,150.9 5,056.7
June 34,037.0 21,915.5 15,637.3 13,182.3 1,584.5 870.5 6,278.2 988.5 5,289.7 7,066.1 5,055.4
July 34,171.7 21,867.2 15,642.3 13,180.8 1,586.4 875.1 6,224.9 988.2 5,236.7 7,153.4 5,151.1
Aug. 34,224.1 21,811.9 15,573.8 13,123.8 1,576.8 873.2 6,238.1 986.1 5,252.0 7,251.6 5,160.6
Sep. 34,369.5 21,796.9 15,601.8 13,156.3 1,574.7 870.9 6,195.0 987.3 5,207.8 7,195.8 5,376.8
Oct. 34,326.1 21,755.4 15,598.7 13,167.0 1,555.7 876.0 6,156.7 984.1 5,172.6 7,262.7 5,308.1
Nov. 34,122.3 21,851.9 15,660.3 13,220.8 1,558.6 881.0 6,191.6 980.8 5,210.7 7,252.0 5,018.4
Dec. 33,749.5 21,859.7 15,626.9 13,177.4 1,552.2 897.3 6,232.9 989.4 5,243.4 7,143.5 4,746.2
2024 Jan. 33,820.8 21,827.2 15,622.9 13,145.8 1,569.5 907.5 6,204.3 987.6 5,216.7 7,293.5 4,700.1
Feb. 33,992.4 21,841.1 15,654.0 13,167.9 1,569.9 916.2 6,187.2 977.4 5,209.8 7,382.8 4,768.5
Mar. 34,205.3 21,915.1 15,704.4 13,208.4 1,567.4 928.6 6,210.7 977.0 5,233.7 7,545.7 4,744.5
Apr. 34,382.7 21,920.0 15,722.4 13,231.5 1,562.7 928.3 6,197.6 980.4 5,217.2 7,599.5 4,863.1
May 34,346.6 21,897.2 15,721.6 13,232.0 1,560.0 929.6 6,175.6 977.7 5,197.9 7,640.2 4,809.1
June 34,354.3 21,978.4 15,780.3 13,299.1 1,563.0 918.2 6,198.1 980.7 5,217.4 7,673.4 4,702.5
July 34,372.3 21,997.9 15,795.6 13,314.2 1,557.8 923.5 6,202.3 975.8 5,226.5 7,732.9 4,641.5
Aug. 34,359.4 21,988.7 15,774.1 13,295.5 1,559.0 919.6 6,214.6 975.8 5,238.8 7,752.8 4,617.8
Sep. 34,651.9 22,057.0 15,819.1 13,336.0 1,560.6 922.5 6,237.9 973.7 5,264.1 7,906.8 4,688.0
Oct. 34,808.0 22,035.5 15,832.5 13,342.4 1,564.8 925.3 6,203.0 983.8 5,219.2 7,996.1 4,776.4
Nov. 35,382.0 22,115.2 15,877.8 13,371.8 1,572.6 933.4 6,237.4 984.5 5,252.9 8,240.0 5,026.8
German contribution (€ billion)
2022 Oct. 8,826.7 5,366.0 4,163.6 3,634.6 245.9 283.1 1,202.4 284.8 917.5 1,509.0 1,951.8
Nov. 8,653.9 5,402.0 4,189.2 3,656.3 249.8 283.1 1,212.8 283.4 929.4 1,502.4 1,749.6
Dec. 8,626.1 5,345.2 4,165.8 3,636.7 245.9 283.2 1,179.4 283.2 896.1 1,417.3 1,863.7
2023 Jan. 8,561.4 5,377.1 4,178.3 3,652.7 245.9 279.7 1,198.8 285.0 913.9 1,443.8 1,740.5
Feb. 8,712.0 5,371.7 4,186.6 3,662.2 243.6 280.9 1,185.1 284.0 901.1 1,443.9 1,896.4
Mar. 8,573.5 5,388.1 4,193.6 3,661.9 252.1 279.6 1,194.5 284.2 910.3 1,457.2 1,728.2
Apr. 8,559.3 5,383.7 4,206.2 3,672.7 252.4 281.1 1,177.5 287.7 889.8 1,435.7 1,739.8
May 8,614.3 5,389.9 4,217.4 3,685.4 252.1 279.9 1,172.6 286.1 886.4 1,468.3 1,756.1
June 8,647.9 5,387.4 4,215.9 3,679.0 255.5 281.4 1,171.5 284.2 887.4 1,433.5 1,826.9
July 8,779.6 5,390.2 4,222.0 3,685.7 255.6 280.6 1,168.3 287.2 881.1 1,439.0 1,950.5
Aug. 8,776.6 5,383.7 4,215.6 3,685.5 249.4 280.6 1,168.1 285.0 883.0 1,442.2 1,950.7
Sep. 8,834.2 5,362.1 4,216.4 3,686.3 248.5 281.5 1,145.8 288.4 857.4 1,446.5 2,025.5
Oct. 8,844.5 5,360.6 4,215.5 3,685.5 247.9 282.1 1,145.1 291.6 853.5 1,461.4 2,022.6
Nov. 8,661.3 5,385.7 4,228.0 3,697.3 248.4 282.3 1,157.8 289.7 868.1 1,446.0 1,829.6
Dec. 8,491.7 5,384.9 4,217.3 3,682.2 247.9 287.2 1,167.6 287.1 880.5 1,432.1 1,674.6
2024 Jan. 8,532.9 5,390.7 4,218.3 3,682.5 246.2 289.6 1,172.4 289.5 882.9 1,463.2 1,679.1
Feb. 8,600.8 5,391.4 4,236.7 3,694.8 250.2 291.7 1,154.7 287.7 867.0 1,502.2 1,707.2
Mar. 8,586.9 5,404.4 4,241.0 3,697.7 246.0 297.3 1,163.4 289.8 873.7 1,524.9 1,657.5
Apr. 8,673.8 5,380.1 4,235.7 3,697.3 244.1 294.3 1,144.4 293.1 851.3 1,544.0 1,749.8
May 8,644.6 5,383.0 4,248.9 3,704.9 246.6 297.4 1,134.1 291.8 842.3 1,573.2 1,688.4
June 8,574.0 5,393.1 4,244.9 3,703.4 247.7 293.7 1,148.2 295.0 853.2 1,566.2 1,614.8
July 8,449.2 5,410.8 4,252.2 3,711.1 244.7 296.3 1,158.6 295.1 863.5 1,563.6 1,474.8
Aug. 8,402.4 5,408.8 4,257.5 3,718.0 244.0 295.4 1,151.4 293.9 857.5 1,573.0 1,420.6
Sep. 8,536.6 5,431.5 4,266.3 3,725.5 244.7 296.1 1,165.2 296.6 868.7 1,625.2 1,479.9
Oct. 8,661.8 5,413.0 4,266.8 3,725.3 244.3 297.2 1,146.2 302.1 844.1 1,650.3 1,598.5
Nov. 8,829.9 5,445.3 4,291.5 3,739.5 253.6 298.4 1,153.8 302.2 851.6 1,690.6 1,694.1
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national
central banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Including money market paper ofenterprises.  3 Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by general
government.  4 Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p.12●). Excluding
MFIs` cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
11•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed
maturities ofAt agreed
notice of  6
Currency
in
circulation  4 Totalof which:
in euro  5 Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 monthsEnd of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
1,537.2 16,094.9 14,708.1 14,936.4 9,513.8 987.2 130.0 1,740.4 2,522.9 42.1 2022 Oct.
1,533.7 16,084.3 14,722.5 14,917.2 9,448.4 1,036.9 134.1 1,739.6 2,516.0 42.3 Nov.
1,545.3 15,996.8 14,766.2 14,929.6 9,380.0 1,094.3 133.8 1,749.0 2,530.0 42.4 Dec.
1,533.4 15,876.1 14,667.2 14,844.5 9,212.2 1,160.0 146.3 1,745.7 2,532.0 48.2 2023 Jan.
1,529.9 15,842.9 14,625.3 14,773.4 9,067.7 1,220.4 157.6 1,746.0 2,531.8 49.9 Feb.
1,533.8 15,891.9 14,649.7 14,788.7 8,973.5 1,309.2 173.8 1,756.0 2,524.8 51.4 Mar.
1,537.9 15,848.9 14,650.2 14,784.8 8,924.0 1,341.7 187.5 1,764.9 2,513.9 52.8 Apr.
1,539.7 15,718.0 14,618.0 14,756.7 8,840.4 1,383.3 199.5 1,767.3 2,511.0 55.2 May
1,542.7 15,760.5 14,649.9 14,755.8 8,761.2 1,451.8 217.6 1,767.5 2,499.8 58.0 June
1,545.9 15,696.0 14,619.8 14,725.4 8,668.3 1,508.3 231.0 1,767.7 2,489.2 60.9 July
1,538.3 15,646.8 14,595.4 14,694.0 8,578.0 1,579.2 240.9 1,765.9 2,465.1 65.0 Aug.
1,535.2 15,756.0 14,654.7 14,766.5 8,569.2 1,647.6 255.2 1,782.7 2,441.7 70.1 Sep.
1,530.8 15,636.6 14,576.9 14,702.2 8,421.3 1,736.5 275.6 1,773.4 2,420.5 74.9 Oct.
1,527.9 15,648.3 14,645.5 14,759.2 8,426.3 1,776.1 286.2 1,782.0 2,408.0 80.6 Nov.
1,541.7 15,822.6 14,816.0 14,927.5 8,489.3 1,826.8 302.1 1,795.3 2,427.3 86.7 Dec.
1,524.2 15,687.2 14,668.3 14,801.5 8,295.5 1,879.2 317.0 1,793.6 2,423.4 92.8 2024 Jan.
1,523.5 15,709.3 14,689.3 14,792.0 8,241.0 1,924.1 325.3 1,790.1 2,413.7 97.8 Feb.
1,528.9 15,792.0 14,786.0 14,897.9 8,297.0 1,964.2 327.5 1,795.6 2,412.7 100.9 Mar.
1,531.4 15,780.1 14,757.6 14,899.5 8,292.2 1,977.9 328.1 1,788.2 2,409.6 103.5 Apr.
1,534.2 15,826.2 14,819.5 14,960.6 8,321.3 2,000.0 328.6 1,789.7 2,415.9 105.3 May
1,541.2 15,990.4 14,963.9 15,083.4 8,422.0 2,020.4 325.6 1,794.6 2,414.4 106.4 June
1,545.2 15,879.7 14,869.8 15,026.9 8,358.4 2,043.9 322.4 1,785.9 2,408.8 107.4 July
1,543.7 15,993.0 14,950.1 15,098.6 8,415.4 2,056.8 321.7 1,781.8 2,414.5 108.4 Aug.
1,542.2 16,053.5 15,001.3 15,137.1 8,423.0 2,082.0 326.0 1,793.6 2,402.3 110.2 Sep.
1,542.1 16,057.7 14,983.8 15,144.4 8,432.6 2,093.2 323.4 1,787.7 2,396.0 111.6 Oct.
1,546.0 16,194.5 15,153.8 15,292.1 8,587.0 2,078.5 320.3 1,795.0 2,399.4 111.9 Nov.
German contribution (€ billion)
371.8 4,546.8 4,270.2 4,140.4 2,804.0 233.2 31.6 529.3 519.8 22.4 2022 Oct.
371.5 4,578.7 4,283.7 4,146.3 2,806.0 240.1 32.1 531.0 514.4 22.6 Nov.
374.0 4,534.2 4,260.8 4,119.2 2,764.3 260.2 34.1 527.1 510.4 23.0 Dec.
368.9 4,489.3 4,257.7 4,126.0 2,749.9 286.6 36.9 529.6 499.1 24.0 2023 Jan.
368.1 4,496.6 4,250.9 4,106.5 2,706.5 314.2 39.1 530.3 491.2 25.2 Feb.
369.0 4,505.7 4,236.8 4,090.4 2,667.4 336.4 42.4 536.3 481.0 26.8 Mar.
369.8 4,473.0 4,248.0 4,104.2 2,660.3 360.2 46.1 538.3 471.0 28.3 Apr.
370.7 4,469.7 4,256.0 4,103.8 2,647.5 373.8 50.3 540.9 460.8 30.5 May
371.7 4,460.3 4,259.3 4,096.2 2,616.5 400.5 54.1 541.0 450.9 33.2 June
373.1 4,455.4 4,259.2 4,106.1 2,603.8 426.9 57.6 540.8 440.7 36.2 July
371.2 4,460.4 4,259.8 4,101.7 2,577.8 455.8 61.5 538.1 429.6 38.9 Aug.
369.4 4,448.9 4,258.5 4,104.2 2,568.6 468.0 66.2 538.5 421.1 41.8 Sep.
369.0 4,447.4 4,259.3 4,129.3 2,553.2 507.9 73.1 538.5 411.7 44.8 Oct.
368.6 4,454.3 4,281.0 4,149.1 2,561.8 515.9 79.5 542.6 401.2 48.3 Nov.
371.4 4,470.1 4,290.9 4,150.5 2,539.8 532.4 84.0 547.3 396.2 50.8 Dec.
375.1 4,448.1 4,271.5 4,150.1 2,502.4 569.5 89.5 548.1 387.2 53.4 2024 Jan.
374.5 4,447.8 4,273.8 4,147.4 2,481.0 590.5 94.7 545.6 379.8 55.8 Feb.
375.2 4,475.1 4,300.5 4,166.8 2,483.2 607.5 97.0 547.6 374.1 57.4 Mar.
376.6 4,471.9 4,300.6 4,182.7 2,486.3 620.9 98.9 549.6 368.6 58.4 Apr.
377.0 4,506.4 4,331.5 4,204.0 2,501.4 626.2 100.7 552.3 364.5 58.9 May
378.6 4,503.4 4,332.6 4,196.1 2,501.6 619.0 102.5 553.7 360.1 59.2 June
380.3 4,494.3 4,327.9 4,212.7 2,507.6 632.9 103.3 553.6 355.9 59.4 July
379.3 4,560.5 4,387.5 4,265.1 2,551.7 643.3 104.6 553.0 353.0 59.5 Aug.
378.4 4,568.2 4,398.5 4,270.7 2,556.5 645.1 105.3 553.2 350.3 60.3 Sep.
378.1 4,572.0 4,401.7 4,288.6 2,567.4 653.4 105.8 553.1 347.9 61.0 Oct.
379.1 4,623.1 4,456.0 4,335.1 2,616.4 640.1 106.8 565.5 346.1 60.3 Nov.
euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by theBundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item "Intra-Eurosystem
liability/claim related to banknote issue" (see "Other liability items").  5 Excluding central
governments' deposits.  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
12•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) * (cont'd)
Liabilities (cont'd)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont'd)
General government 
 
Debt securities 
Other general governmentRepo transactions
with non-banks
in the euro area
 
With agreed maturities of 
At agreed notice of  2
End of
monthCentral
govern-
ment Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 months Totalof which:
Enterprises
and
householdsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  3 Totalof which:
Denom-
inated
in euro
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2022 Oct. 678.1 480.5 287.5 109.2 24.3 41.5 14.7 3.2 268.2 268.2 625.8 2,118.8 1,405.0
Nov. 668.3 498.8 306.5 109.1 25.1 40.8 14.2 3.2 294.8 294.8 648.0 2,149.8 1,432.2
Dec. 583.5 483.7 296.2 103.6 27.2 40.2 13.5 3.0 247.7 247.7 650.9 2,155.0 1,463.5
2023 Jan. 550.6 480.9 283.2 113.2 27.5 40.6 12.8 3.7 283.3 283.3 657.7 2,195.2 1,500.6
Feb. 570.9 498.6 297.5 115.2 28.7 40.3 13.2 3.7 281.6 281.5 651.3 2,247.7 1,520.1
Mar. 602.4 500.8 288.6 125.8 28.4 39.6 14.7 3.7 255.3 255.2 662.3 2,246.0 1,540.4
Apr. 575.3 488.8 278.5 123.3 29.7 39.4 14.2 3.7 261.7 261.3 683.4 2,242.5 1,550.5
May 470.7 490.6 277.9 126.7 29.3 39.4 13.8 3.6 291.9 287.8 685.0 2,288.8 1,579.9
June 495.1 509.5 288.6 134.7 29.4 39.3 13.8 3.6 280.4 280.3 678.8 2,302.0 1,589.6
July 466.0 504.6 281.7 137.7 28.4 39.4 13.9 3.6 284.1 283.4 689.4 2,391.9 1,635.9
Aug. 446.0 506.9 283.2 138.6 28.0 39.6 13.8 3.5 288.9 288.9 698.0 2,409.5 1,645.9
Sep. 481.2 508.2 285.3 136.7 29.3 39.7 13.8 3.4 281.7 281.7 697.3 2,431.8 1,657.7
Oct. 452.7 481.7 266.6 131.0 28.5 39.2 13.1 3.3 306.8 306.6 716.2 2,491.3 1,694.5
Nov. 404.4 484.6 274.9 127.5 27.2 38.9 13.0 3.2 328.5 328.4 733.2 2,489.2 1,696.6
Dec. 418.8 476.3 265.6 128.4 28.4 38.6 12.4 3.1 320.5 320.5 746.5 2,485.3 1,701.1
2024 Jan. 437.3 448.4 238.5 127.8 28.4 37.5 12.2 4.0 345.4 343.4 777.5 2,529.0 1,731.0
Feb. 446.3 470.9 260.7 130.6 26.1 38.1 11.7 3.8 348.0 347.3 766.2 2,538.8 1,749.8
Mar. 419.6 474.5 258.7 135.5 26.9 37.7 12.0 3.7 372.0 371.2 781.9 2,563.6 1,761.6
Apr. 442.7 437.9 232.4 129.8 22.6 37.7 11.8 3.7 378.6 372.2 804.7 2,593.4 1,775.4
May 418.5 447.1 244.2 127.8 22.2 37.7 11.6 3.6 374.8 366.0 785.5 2,578.6 1,771.1
June 422.7 484.3 275.5 133.7 22.8 37.4 11.4 3.5 383.8 383.7 796.9 2,586.0 1,770.7
July 395.4 457.5 253.1 129.9 22.9 36.9 11.2 3.5 408.1 390.0 819.1 2,582.7 1,774.5
Aug. 430.1 464.4 263.3 126.9 22.7 36.9 11.1 3.5 437.4 416.6 835.1 2,579.1 1,783.2
Sep. 426.5 489.9 283.2 135.2 20.7 36.8 10.6 3.4 413.3 400.2 836.4 2,589.4 1,802.2
Oct. 450.8 462.5 269.4 123.1 20.2 36.9 9.6 3.4 418.3 397.0 855.9 2,613.0 1,798.7
Nov. 408.8 493.6 299.9 124.2 20.0 36.6 9.5 3.3 426.1 411.9 873.0 2,620.5 1,790.7
German contribution (€ billion)
2022 Oct. 152.5 253.9 108.1 93.1 20.5 30.1 2.1 0.1 5.2 5.2 2.5 633.9 398.1
Nov. 175.5 256.9 114.7 88.9 21.5 29.8 1.9 0.1 8.3 8.3 2.5 634.2 402.6
Dec. 159.2 255.8 117.3 83.2 23.9 29.6 1.8 0.1 6.3 6.3 2.6 631.2 409.3
2023 Jan. 116.4 246.9 99.4 92.2 23.8 29.8 1.6 0.1 6.1 6.1 2.4 639.6 417.9
Feb. 129.3 260.8 110.3 94.6 24.6 29.7 1.5 0.1 7.5 7.5 2.3 651.5 427.1
Mar. 156.4 258.8 102.2 101.4 24.1 29.6 1.4 0.1 7.2 7.2 2.6 658.0 440.3
Apr. 117.4 251.4 97.3 97.8 25.4 29.5 1.3 0.1 7.9 7.9 2.7 654.9 446.8
May 105.6 260.2 104.8 99.5 25.0 29.7 1.2 0.1 7.7 7.7 2.6 670.6 458.1
June 95.9 268.2 106.1 106.5 24.9 29.5 1.1 0.1 7.3 7.3 2.6 671.6 452.8
July 89.5 259.9 96.6 109.1 23.7 29.5 0.9 0.1 7.6 7.6 2.9 679.9 457.6
Aug. 96.8 261.9 100.9 107.1 23.3 29.6 0.9 0.1 8.7 8.7 3.0 688.8 469.0
Sep. 85.2 259.5 97.5 107.0 24.5 29.6 0.8 0.1 7.8 7.8 3.0 705.6 470.0
Oct. 82.8 235.3 81.6 99.3 24.1 29.4 0.7 0.1 8.5 8.5 2.9 713.0 476.3
Nov. 73.3 231.8 81.2 97.7 22.7 29.2 0.7 0.1 9.6 9.6 3.0 706.2 471.0
Dec. 81.1 238.6 84.9 100.3 23.9 28.6 0.7 0.1 8.4 8.4 3.2 699.9 476.8
2024 Jan. 74.4 223.6 75.5 95.6 24.0 27.8 0.7 0.1 11.4 11.4 3.3 717.4 486.5
Feb. 72.0 228.4 78.6 98.8 21.6 28.6 0.6 0.1 12.4 12.4 3.3 727.1 494.5
Mar. 74.0 234.4 79.3 103.5 22.5 28.3 0.6 0.1 11.0 10.9 3.5 727.8 501.4
Apr. 71.2 218.0 72.0 97.9 19.3 28.2 0.6 0.1 10.6 10.6 3.7 737.0 505.8
May 74.7 227.7 83.8 96.1 18.9 28.2 0.6 0.1 10.3 10.3 3.8 738.4 508.7
June 70.5 236.9 85.4 103.0 19.9 27.9 0.5 0.1 11.1 11.1 4.0 741.5 506.2
July 64.4 217.3 71.8 97.3 19.9 27.6 0.5 0.1 11.9 11.9 4.2 731.6 506.8
Aug. 71.1 224.3 81.5 94.7 19.7 27.7 0.5 0.1 13.5 13.5 4.6 731.6 506.9
Sep. 65.6 231.9 83.1 102.8 17.8 27.6 0.5 0.1 10.8 10.8 4.9 730.4 508.9
Oct. 68.3 215.1 77.8 91.7 17.3 27.8 0.5 0.1 10.5 10.5 4.9 735.5 506.3
Nov. 62.5 225.5 87.6 92.6 17.3 27.5 0.5 0.1 7.9 7.9 4.7 733.0 504.6
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national central
banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 In Germany, only savings deposits.
3 Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding German MFIs'
portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area.  4 In Germany, bank debt
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper.5 Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued.  6 After deduction of inter-MFI
participations.  7 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.
8 Including DEM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on p. 10●). 9 For
the German contribution, the difference between the volume of euro banknotes

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
13•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  Memo item:
Other liability items  
 
issued (net)  3Monetary aggregates  7
(from 2002 German contribution
excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
up to
1 year  4over
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsLiabilities
to non-
euro area
residents  5Capital
and
reserves  6Excess
of
inter-MFI
liabilities Total  8of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem-
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12Monetary
capital
forma-
tion  13Monetary
liabilities
of central
govern-
ments
(Post
Office,
Treasury)  14 End of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
3.8 23.9 2,091.1 6,038.8 2,794.9 38.3 4,999.1 0.0 11,512.1 15,323.3 16,101.2 6,713.2 196.4 2022 Oct.
23.7 22.8 2,103.3 5,881.3 2,842.8 66.5 4,700.8 0.0 11,466.5 15,324.0 16,152.7 6,771.9 200.1 Nov.
31.7 23.2 2,100.0 5,553.5 2,805.2 58.0 4,833.3 0.0 11,388.1 15,316.6 16,132.9 6,739.9 192.7 Dec.
17.6 27.9 2,149.7 5,636.6 2,863.0 86.0 4,672.5 0.0 11,199.1 15,212.2 16,043.9 6,850.9 191.6 2023 Jan.
47.0 30.4 2,170.3 5,670.8 2,817.1 79.8 4,971.0 0.0 11,066.2 15,154.2 16,009.8 6,827.3 192.2 Feb.
53.9 30.4 2,161.7 5,667.1 2,902.7 90.1 4,689.7 0.0 10,955.3 15,155.0 16,004.7 6,915.1 182.5 Mar.
50.2 32.9 2,159.4 5,633.5 2,895.0 110.4 4,728.9 0.0 10,900.3 15,133.6 16,008.3 6,915.2 182.9 Apr.
56.0 32.8 2,200.0 5,722.1 2,910.6 155.5 4,815.8 0.0 10,813.4 15,100.0 15,991.5 6,976.1 178.5 May
49.8 33.0 2,219.3 5,584.4 2,881.2 147.2 4,859.8 0.0 10,747.9 15,117.6 15,990.6 6,968.9 178.0 June
47.0 34.0 2,311.0 5,594.1 2,900.4 102.5 4,967.3 0.0 10,653.6 15,084.7 15,985.1 7,083.0 180.5 July
50.1 33.4 2,326.0 5,656.5 2,919.6 122.1 4,944.4 0.0 10,553.8 15,042.0 15,946.1 7,119.7 176.9 Aug.
45.1 36.4 2,350.4 5,541.1 2,883.4 113.5 5,129.5 0.0 10,547.2 15,094.2 16,001.0 7,129.7 180.3 Sep.
54.5 36.6 2,400.2 5,511.8 2,908.5 121.7 5,102.5 0.0 10,375.9 15,003.5 15,954.5 7,199.5 179.6 Oct.
45.2 36.0 2,408.1 5,446.4 2,937.9 165.3 4,845.6 0.0 10,387.7 15,047.8 16,020.2 7,250.8 180.8 Nov.
46.0 34.8 2,404.5 5,299.3 3,004.7 56.1 4,472.7 0.0 10,446.0 15,199.4 16,192.2 7,332.8 177.4 Dec.
40.5 36.1 2,452.3 5,334.6 3,004.2 105.8 4,512.9 0.0 10,212.5 15,026.6 16,060.4 7,384.3 180.3 2024 Jan.
33.5 36.3 2,469.0 5,447.9 2,966.0 99.1 4,593.7 0.0 10,182.0 15,039.4 16,057.9 7,364.8 182.7 Feb.
22.2 40.0 2,501.4 5,483.2 3,028.1 106.0 4,549.7 0.0 10,240.0 15,143.3 16,181.4 7,467.4 179.9 Mar.
28.0 39.5 2,525.9 5,462.6 3,022.6 108.0 4,701.2 0.0 10,223.2 15,123.2 16,210.5 7,481.5 187.4 Apr.
17.8 42.4 2,518.3 5,464.0 3,022.0 104.6 4,656.8 0.0 10,252.6 15,178.7 16,240.1 7,476.6 173.0 May
13.8 43.5 2,528.7 5,420.1 3,059.0 70.6 4,506.4 0.0 10,394.7 15,343.9 16,399.3 7,529.6 176.8 June
13.2 43.1 2,526.4 5,381.3 3,118.5 105.4 4,532.2 0.0 10,311.8 15,271.9 16,388.6 7,578.7 176.1 July
– 1.3 51.2 2,529.2 5,338.9 3,139.9 41.4 4,450.9 0.0 10,378.1 15,352.5 16,481.7 7,599.7 176.5 Aug.
3.6 54.7 2,531.2 5,405.5 3,203.4 42.8 4,565.3 0.0 10,405.5 15,402.2 16,525.2 7,678.5 176.9 Sep.
3.5 54.8 2,554.7 5,385.3 3,256.7 43.2 4,635.7 0.0 10,399.4 15,384.4 16,547.3 7,751.0 175.0 Oct.
– 11.2 54.0 2,577.7 5,587.9 3,279.9 14.7 4,839.2 0.0 10,593.5 15,565.0 16,730.1 7,804.5 180.1 Nov.
German contribution (€ billion)
19.1 9.7 605.0 1,355.1 693.8 –1,215.2 2,804.7 516.8 2,912.1 3,812.3 3,848.8 1,880.8 0.0 2022 Oct.
20.8 11.2 602.2 1,310.2 714.6 –1,191.2 2,596.7 516.8 2,920.8 3,819.7 3,862.5 1,900.3 0.0 Nov.
20.2 11.7 599.3 1,265.7 690.1 –1,230.4 2,726.5 518.9 2,881.6 3,795.1 3,835.9 1,869.2 0.0 Dec.
24.0 13.1 602.4 1,226.5 689.1 –1,117.5 2,625.9 521.2 2,849.3 3,789.5 3,835.2 1,874.9 0.0 2023 Jan.
29.3 15.8 606.4 1,171.8 668.4 –1,073.2 2,787.2 522.2 2,816.8 3,782.0 3,836.8 1,860.1 0.0 Feb.
36.2 17.5 604.3 1,188.0 700.6 –1,129.7 2,641.2 524.5 2,769.6 3,756.4 3,819.8 1,897.7 0.0 Mar.
37.0 18.5 599.4 1,107.1 704.2 –1,028.5 2,637.8 526.4 2,757.6 3,759.4 3,825.5 1,899.8 0.0 Apr.
41.2 19.5 609.9 1,122.5 715.6 –1,036.9 2,662.4 529.0 2,752.3 3,762.8 3,833.9 1,926.7 0.0 May
44.6 19.2 607.9 1,099.9 709.8 –1,026.8 2,723.1 530.7 2,722.6 3,760.6 3,834.2 1,921.6 0.0 June
44.5 19.9 615.4 1,070.7 724.0 –996.4 2,835.7 532.2 2,700.4 3,759.3 3,834.2 1,946.1 0.0 July
51.0 20.6 617.2 1,044.4 734.2 –998.8 2,835.9 535.1 2,678.7 3,756.9 3,840.1 1,958.1 0.0 Aug.
48.5 22.6 634.5 1,048.4 722.8 –1,000.9 2,898.6 538.7 2,666.2 3,753.7 3,835.5 1,967.4 0.0 Sep.
49.7 24.4 639.0 1,035.9 735.9 –998.0 2,898.7 540.2 2,634.8 3,751.7 3,837.2 1,987.9 0.0 Oct.
49.6 23.6 633.1 1,012.0 753.5 –983.0 2,705.7 541.3 2,643.0 3,760.7 3,846.5 2,006.8 0.0 Nov.
45.9 25.0 629.0 1,016.2 778.6 –1,034.8 2,550.2 543.7 2,624.7 3,762.2 3,844.6 2,034.5 0.0 Dec.
46.9 25.6 645.0 967.8 758.4 –959.8 2,586.3 536.2 2,577.9 3,744.3 3,831.5 2,032.8 0.0 2024 Jan.
46.4 26.4 654.4 1,024.7 731.1 –992.0 2,646.3 538.6 2,559.6 3,745.7 3,834.2 2,015.6 0.0 Feb.
45.7 26.7 655.4 1,022.6 744.6 –988.1 2,590.4 541.5 2,562.4 3,767.6 3,854.5 2,033.5 0.0 Mar.
40.9 26.3 669.7 987.7 747.2 –960.2 2,676.0 543.3 2,558.3 3,764.4 3,846.0 2,053.2 0.0 Apr.
39.6 25.8 673.1 1,001.7 746.9 –986.7 2,623.7 545.7 2,585.2 3,792.3 3,871.8 2,059.4 0.0 May
43.9 25.7 671.9 1,015.1 777.5 –1,013.2 2,534.5 547.3 2,587.0 3,792.0 3,876.7 2,090.4 0.0 June
40.7 25.6 665.3 951.2 798.5 –972.6 2,430.1 550.2 2,579.4 3,789.3 3,871.6 2,104.4 0.0 July
42.8 24.8 664.0 949.8 808.5 –1,038.9 2,372.7 554.4 2,633.2 3,849.0 3,934.8 2,112.8 0.0 Aug.
45.8 23.9 660.7 1,003.0 830.4 –1,045.3 2,434.4 558.3 2,639.6 3,861.4 3,946.7 2,132.3 0.0 Sep.
43.4 22.1 670.1 971.7 849.3 –1,023.0 2,540.8 561.3 2,645.2 3,861.7 3,942.5 2,161.4 0.0 Oct.
45.6 21.3 666.1 996.6 848.4 –1,009.4 2,625.7 563.4 2,703.9 3,907.2 3,986.6 2,168.0 0.0 Nov.
actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2).  10 Overnight deposits (excluding central governments'
deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central governments'
overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the consolidated balance
sheet.  11 M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to two years and at agreednotice of up to three months (excluding central governments' deposits) and (for the
euro area) central governments' monetary liabilities with such maturities.  12 M2 plus
repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt securities
up to two years.  13 Deposits with agreed maturities of over two years and at agreed
notice of over three months, debt securities with maturities of over two years, capital
and reserves.  14 Non-existent in Germany.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
14•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
3. Banking systems liquidity position *
Stocks
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8
Eurosystem 2
2022 Dec. 960.4 1.9 1,947.1 0.0 4,946.1 4,521.5 0.0 1,560.8 492.5 1,066.9 213.8 6,296.2
2023 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 940.4 1.2 1,303.3 0.1 4,942.1 4,051.6 0.0 1,565.6 372.8 1,001.6 195.6 5,812.7
Mar. 916.8 0.9 1,233.3 0.0 4,939.0 4,103.0 0.0 1,553.9 380.2 861.8 191.1 5,848.0
Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 945.0 1.4 1,117.7 0.1 4,905.6 3,996.1 0.0 1,559.8 360.6 870.5 182.7 5,738.6
June 948.2 1.6 1,100.5 0.1 4,884.1 4,126.4 0.0 1,563.7 256.4 806.6 181.6 5,871.7
July . . . . . . . . . . . .
Aug. 927.8 10.9 682.0 0.1 4,853.0 3,704.4 0.0 1,567.0 254.4 770.5 177.4 5,448.9
Sep. 924.3 5.6 601.0 0.1 4,811.2 3,647.4 0.0 1,564.2 222.5 733.8 174.3 5,386.0
Oct. 931.2 8.1 515.4 0.1 4,767.9 3,577.4 0.0 1,554.7 222.7 693.3 174.6 5,306.7
Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec. 933.3 7.3 495.9 0.0 4,715.0 3,548.8 0.0 1,551.1 194.1 685.3 172.0 5,271.9
2024 Jan. 958.3 7.9 396.2 0.1 4,686.8 3,487.4 0.0 1,556.7 168.4 666.3 170.5 5,214.6
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 966.5 4.8 397.3 0.0 4,646.4 3,490.9 0.0 1,543.2 168.5 643.8 168.6 5,202.7
Apr. 1,002.8 2.8 249.4 0.0 4,599.5 3,337.9 0.0 1,546.1 137.8 664.3 168.4 5,052.3
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 1,031.7 2.5 149.1 0.0 4,550.7 3,214.0 0.0 1,551.5 119.5 682.3 166.7 4,932.1
July 1,063.7 5.7 104.9 0.0 4,494.3 3,113.2 0.0 1,559.5 115.2 712.7 168.1 4,840.8
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 1,083.7 3.0 85.5 0.0 4,442.0 3,058.7 0.0 1,564.2 119.2 702.9 169.3 4,792.2
Oct. 1,123.9 7.8 49.2 0.0 4,396.1 2,989.1 0.0 1,560.2 117.4 741.1 169.0 4,718.4
Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec. 1,145.7 9.1 40.7 0.0 4,334.0 2,927.9 0.0 1,563.1 114.2 756.2 168.1 4,659.2
Deutsche Bundesbank
2022 Dec. 232.4 0.5 352.5 0.0 1,079.2 1,346.6 0.0 378.8 121.0 – 242.4 60.5 1,785.9
2023 Jan. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Feb. 229.8 0.4 231.9 0.1 1,076.8 1,234.6 0.0 377.2 77.8 – 205.4 54.8 1,666.7
Mar. 228.9 0.4 212.8 0.0 1,077.0 1,263.7 0.0 374.5 69.2 – 242.5 54.2 1,692.4
Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 239.2 0.7 200.2 0.1 1,066.1 1,228.0 0.0 375.7 73.4 – 221.1 50.1 1,653.9
June 241.7 0.7 198.9 0.1 1,056.8 1,256.3 0.0 377.2 54.7 – 241.8 52.0 1,685.4
July . . . . . . . . . . . .
Aug. 236.2 1.5 142.4 0.1 1,048.8 1,175.5 0.0 377.5 49.9 – 222.5 48.4 1,601.5
Sep. 234.5 0.8 131.2 0.1 1,041.3 1,177.8 0.0 377.3 40.1 – 235.4 48.0 1,603.1
Oct. 235.7 1.3 96.3 0.0 1,024.0 1,151.1 0.0 374.9 28.7 – 245.4 47.9 1,574.0
Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec. 236.8 0.7 89.2 0.0 1,016.7 1,171.3 0.0 373.5 18.9 – 267.7 47.3 1,592.1
2024 Jan. 243.9 0.9 69.5 0.1 1,005.8 1,127.3 0.0 379.3 19.8 – 253.3 47.0 1,553.6
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 246.5 0.7 69.3 0.0 996.7 1,164.4 0.0 379.2 16.3 – 293.4 46.7 1,590.3
Apr. 257.8 0.7 40.4 0.0 983.5 1,122.4 0.0 379.4 17.1 – 282.5 45.9 1,547.7
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 265.9 0.6 21.3 0.0 970.0 1,102.8 0.0 380.9 13.5 – 285.8 46.3 1,530.0
July 275.7 0.7 15.7 0.0 954.3 1,092.8 0.0 383.0 12.1 – 287.6 46.1 1,521.9
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 280.5 0.6 13.3 0.0 943.3 1,044.7 0.0 384.6 11.4 – 249.5 46.6 1,475.9
Oct. 292.6 1.0 8.8 0.0 929.0 1,031.5 0.0 384.1 11.7 – 241.7 45.7 1,461.3
Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec. 299.0 2.0 8.4 0.0 917.7 1,017.3 0.0 383.9 11.4 – 231.6 46.1 1,447.3
Discrepancies may arise from rounding.  * The banking system's liquidity position is
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro area credit institutions with the
Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of the
Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  1 Figures are daily averages
for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following the
changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No figuresare available in such cases.  2 Source: ECB.  3 Includes liquidity provided under the
Eurosystem's asset purchase programmes.  4 From August 2009 includes liquidity
absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem's foreign exchange swap operations.  5 From
2002 euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national cen-
tral banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In accordance with the
accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a
share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
15•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Flows
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Net assets
in gold
and foreign
currencyMain
refinancing
operationsLonger-
term
refinancing
operationsMarginal
lending
facilityOther
liquidity-
providing
operations  3Deposit
facilityOther
liquidity-
absorbing
operations  4Banknotes
in
circulation  5Central
government
depositsOther
factors
(net)  6Credit
institutions`
current
account
balances
(including
minimum
reserves)  7Base
money  8Reserve
maintenance
period
ending in  1
Eurosystem 2
+ 4.6 – 2.1 –171.7 ± 0.0 – 2.2 +31.5 ± 0.0 – 2.9 –44.2 –37.5 –118.2 –89.5 2022 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2023 Jan.
–20.0 – 0.7 –643.8 + 0.1 – 4.0 –469.9 ± 0.0 + 4.8 –119.7 –65.3 –18.2 –483.5 Feb.
–23.6 – 0.3 –70.0 – 0.1 – 3.1 +51.4 ± 0.0 –11.7 +7.4 –139.8 – 4.5 +35.3 Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr.
+28.2 + 0.5 –115.6 + 0.1 –33.4 –106.9 ± 0.0 + 5.9 –19.6 + 8.7 – 8.4 –109.4 May
+ 3.2 + 0.2 –17.2 ± 0.0 –21.5 +130.3 ± 0.0 + 3.9 –104.2 –63.9 – 1.1 +133.1 June
. . . . . . . . . . . . July
–20.4 + 9.3 –418.5 ± 0.0 –31.1 –422.0 ± 0.0 + 3.3 –2.0 –36.1 – 4.2 –422.8 Aug.
– 3.5 – 5.3 –81.0 ± 0.0 –41.8 –57.0 ± 0.0 – 2.8 –31.9 –36.7 – 3.1 –62.9 Sep.
+ 6.9 + 2.5 –85.6 ± 0.0 –43.3 –70.0 ± 0.0 – 9.5 +0.2 –40.5 + 0.3 –79.3 Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov.
+ 2.1 – 0.8 –19.5 – 0.1 –52.9 –28.6 ± 0.0 – 3.6 –28.6 – 8.0 – 2.6 –34.8 Dec.
+25.0 + 0.6 –99.7 + 0.1 –28.2 –61.4 ± 0.0 + 5.6 –25.7 –19.0 – 1.5 –57.3 2024 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
+ 8.2 – 3.1 + 1.1 – 0.1 –40.4 + 3.5 ± 0.0 –13.5 +0.1 –22.5 – 1.9 –11.9 Mar.
+36.3 – 2.0 –147.9 ± 0.0 –46.9 –153.0 ± 0.0 + 2.9 –30.7 +20.5 – 0.2 –150.4 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
+28.9 – 0.3 –100.3 ± 0.0 –48.8 –123.9 ± 0.0 + 5.4 –18.3 +18.0 – 1.7 –120.2 June
+32.0 + 3.2 –44.2 ± 0.0 –56.4 –100.8 ± 0.0 + 8.0 –4.3 +30.4 + 1.4 –91.3 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+20.0 – 2.7 –19.4 ± 0.0 –52.3 –54.5 ± 0.0 + 4.7 +4.0 – 9.8 + 1.2 –48.6 Sep.
+40.2 + 4.8 –36.3 ± 0.0 –45.9 –69.6 ± 0.0 – 4.0 –1.8 +38.2 – 0.3 –73.8 Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov.
+21.8 + 1.3 – 8.5 ± 0.0 –62.1 –61.2 ± 0.0 + 2.9 –3.2 +15.1 – 0.9 –59.2 Dec.
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 0.7 – 0.4 –48.0 + 0.0 + 7.7 +42.7 ± 0.0 – 0.1 –6.2 –11.0 –65.4 –22.9 2022 Dec.
. . . . . . . . . . . .2023 Jan.
– 2.5 – 0.1 –120.6 + 0.1 – 2.4 –112.0 ± 0.0 – 1.6 –43.2 +37.0 – 5.6 –119.3 Feb.
– 1.0 + 0.0 –19.1 – 0.0 + 0.2 +29.1 ± 0.0 – 2.7 –8.6 –37.1 – 0.7 +25.7 Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr.
+10.3 + 0.2 –12.7 + 0.0 –11.0 –35.7 ± 0.0 + 1.2 +4.1 +21.4 – 4.1 –38.5 May
+ 2.6 + 0.1 – 1.3 + 0.0 – 9.3 +28.3 ± 0.0 + 1.4 –18.7 –20.7 + 1.9 +31.5 June
. . . . . . . . . . . . July
– 5.6 + 0.8 –56.5 – 0.0 – 8.0 –80.8 ± 0.0 + 0.4 –4.7 +19.3 – 3.5 –83.9 Aug.
– 1.7 – 0.7 –11.2 + 0.0 – 7.5 + 2.3 ± 0.0 – 0.2 –9.8 –13.0 – 0.4 + 1.6 Sep.
+ 1.2 + 0.5 –35.0 – 0.0 –17.3 –26.7 ± 0.0 – 2.4 –11.5 – 9.9 – 0.0 –29.1 Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov.
+ 1.1 – 0.6 – 7.1 – 0.0 – 7.3 +20.1 ± 0.0 – 1.4 –9.8 –22.3 – 0.7 +18.1 Dec.
+ 7.1 + 0.2 –19.7 + 0.0 –10.9 –44.0 ± 0.0 + 5.8 +0.9 +14.3 – 0.3 –38.5 2024 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
+ 2.6 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 9.0 +37.2 ± 0.0 – 0.2 –3.5 –40.1 – 0.3 +36.7 Mar.
+11.3 + 0.0 –28.9 – 0.0 –13.3 –42.0 ± 0.0 + 0.3 +0.7 +10.9 – 0.8 –42.6 Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
+ 8.1 – 0.1 –19.2 – 0.0 –13.4 –19.6 ± 0.0 + 1.5 –3.5 – 3.2 + 0.4 –17.7 June
+ 9.7 + 0.1 – 5.5 + 0.0 –15.7 –10.0 ± 0.0 + 2.0 –1.4 – 1.8 – 0.2 – 8.2 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 4.9 – 0.1 – 2.4 – 0.0 –11.0 –48.1 ± 0.0 + 1.7 –0.7 +38.0 + 0.5 –46.0 Sep.
+12.0 + 0.4 – 4.5 + 0.0 –14.2 –13.2 ± 0.0 – 0.5 +0.4 + 7.9 – 0.8 –14.6 Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov.
+ 6.4 + 1.0 – 0.4 + 0.0 –11.4 –14.2 ± 0.0 – 0.1 –0.4 +10.0 + 0.3 –14.0 Dec.
allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is shown
under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the euro
banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB
has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other factors”. From 2003 eurobanknotes only.  6 Remaining items in the consolidated financial statement of the Euro-
system and the financial statement of the Bundesbank.  7 Equal to the difference bet-
ween the sum of liquidity-pro viding factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors.
8 Calculated as the sum of the “Deposit facility”, “Banknotes in circulation” and “Credit
institutions' current account balances”.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
16•
III.Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets *
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currencyClaims on non-euro area
residents denominated in euro
As at
reporting
dateTotal
assets 
Gold and gold
receivables TotalReceivables
from the IMFBalances with
banks, security
investments,
external loans
and other
external
assetsClaims on
euro area
residents
denominated
in foreign
currency TotalBalances
with banks,
security
investments
and loansClaims
arising from
the credit
facility under
ERM II
Eurosystem 1
2024 June 21 6,536.8 711.1 506.1 232.4 273.8 15.5 17.1 17.1 –
28 6,522.0 757.5 510.2 232.4 277.8 14.1 17.0 17.0 –
July 5 6,497.7 757.5 510.2 232.4 277.8 15.0 16.9 16.9 –
12 6,494.5 757.5 510.0 232.4 277.5 15.5 16.7 16.7 –
19 6,478.3 757.5 508.6 232.5 276.2 16.3 17.1 17.1 –
26 6,475.5 757.5 507.0 232.4 274.6 16.3 17.2 17.2 –
Aug. 2 6,468.7 757.5 507.3 232.9 274.4 16.9 17.8 17.8 –
9 6,462.2 757.5 506.8 232.9 273.9 17.3 17.4 17.4 –
16 6,449.2 757.5 507.5 233.2 274.4 17.0 17.1 17.1 –
23 6,459.1 757.5 505.2 233.0 272.2 18.9 17.4 17.4 –
30 6,473.1 757.5 503.6 233.0 270.6 18.7 18.1 18.1 –
Sep. 6 6,456.6 757.5 505.9 233.0 272.9 17.3 18.0 18.0 –
13 6,442.5 757.5 506.1 233.0 273.1 17.1 17.5 17.5 –
20 6,428.5 757.5 506.6 233.0 273.6 17.0 17.5 17.5 –
27 6,398.4 757.5 505.3 233.3 272.0 17.4 17.5 17.5 –
Oct. 4 6,438.8 820.0 498.1 230.0 268.1 17.4 17.8 17.8 –
11 6,441.6 820.0 499.2 229.9 269.3 16.8 18.7 18.7 –
18 6,429.1 820.0 498.6 229.6 269.0 17.3 19.0 19.0 –
25 6,414.4 820.0 499.7 229.5 270.3 17.5 19.1 19.1 –
Nov. 1 6,404.2 820.0 499.3 229.2 270.1 15.2 18.8 18.8 –
8 6,393.0 820.0 500.3 229.6 270.8 14.9 19.8 19.8 –
15 6,383.0 820.0 499.2 229.1 270.1 15.9 20.1 20.1 –
22 6,385.1 820.0 500.8 229.3 271.5 15.2 20.1 20.1 –
29 6,372.8 820.0 500.3 229.4 270.9 15.9 20.5 20.5 –
Dec. 6 6,352.0 819.8 501.2 229.4 271.8 15.1 20.3 20.3 –
13 6,353.2 819.6 501.1 229.3 271.9 15.5 20.2 20.2 –
20 6,344.8 819.6 502.5 229.4 273.2 15.8 20.7 20.7 –
27 6,357.2 819.6 502.3 228.7 273.6 15.2 20.3 20.3 –
2025 Jan. 3 6,412.6 872.2 522.6 236.8 285.8 15.1 20.3 20.3 –
10 6,407.2 872.2 521.5 236.6 284.8 16.0 20.0 20.0 –
Deutsche Bundesbank
2024 June 21 2,436.8 220.5 92.4 58.2 34.2 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
28 2,447.3 234.9 93.3 58.2 35.1 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
July 5 2,466.7 234.9 93.2 58.1 35.1 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
12 2,462.3 234.9 92.8 58.1 34.7 0.0 0.3 0.3 –
19 2,418.0 234.9 92.6 58.1 34.5 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
26 2,416.5 234.9 92.3 58.1 34.2 0.0 0.3 0.3 –
Aug. 2 2,425.8 234.9 92.2 58.2 34.0 0.0 1.0 1.0 –
9 2,409.2 234.9 92.1 58.2 33.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 –
16 2,413.9 234.9 92.1 58.2 33.9 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
23 2,384.9 234.9 92.1 58.2 33.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 –
30 2,419.4 234.9 91.6 58.2 33.4 0.0 0.8 0.8 –
Sep. 6 2,395.3 234.9 91.5 58.2 33.3 0.0 0.9 0.9 –
13 2,385.9 234.9 91.7 58.2 33.5 0.0 0.2 0.2 –
20 2,388.4 234.9 92.1 58.2 33.9 0.0 0.5 0.5 –
27 2,380.7 234.9 92.3 58.4 34.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 –
Oct. 4 2,417.4 254.3 90.3 57.5 32.8 0.0 0.3 0.3 –
11 2,433.0 254.3 90.5 57.4 33.0 0.0 1.0 1.0 –
18 2,408.0 254.3 90.2 57.2 33.0 0.0 1.1 1.1 –
25 2,406.3 254.3 91.2 57.2 34.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
Nov. 1 2,397.6 254.3 89.8 57.2 32.7 0.0 0.2 0.2 –
8 2,413.5 254.3 90.0 57.2 32.8 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
15 2,407.7 254.3 90.0 56.9 33.1 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
22 2,402.4 254.3 90.7 57.1 33.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
29 2,403.0 254.3 91.4 57.1 34.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 –
Dec. 6 2,402.0 254.3 90.6 57.1 33.5 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
13 2,406.4 254.3 90.5 57.1 33.4 0.0 0.4 0.4 –
20 2,385.8 254.3 90.5 57.1 33.4 0.0 0.9 0.9 –
27 2,382.6 254.3 90.3 57.1 33.2 0.0 0.6 0.6 –
2025 Jan. 3 2,395.0 270.6 92.8 59.2 33.6 0.0 0.5 0.5 –
10 2,395.6 270.6 93.9 59.0 34.9 0.0 0.1 0.1 –
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet itemsfor foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the end of
the quarter.  1 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
17•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euroSecurities of euro area residents
in euro
TotalMain re-
financing
opera-
tionsLonger-
term re-
financing
opera-
tionsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsStructural
reverse
opera-
tionsMarginal
lending
facility 
 
 
 
Credits
related
to margin
callsOther
claims on
euro area
credit
institutions
denomi-
nated in
euro TotalSecurities
held for
monetary
policy
purposesOther
securitiesGeneral
government
debt deno-
minated in
euroOther
assetsAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 1
151.4 4.3 147.1 – – – – 33.9 4,729.6 4,510.5 219.1 20.8 351.2 2024 June 21
95.0 11.1 83.8 – – 0.1 – 32.5 4,714.7 4,496.0 218.7 20.8 360.1 28
90.6 6.7 83.8 – – 0.1 – 28.4 4,707.1 4,489.0 218.1 20.8 351.2 July 5
89.2 5.3 83.8 – – 0.0 – 22.3 4,707.3 4,488.7 218.6 20.8 355.1 12
88.5 4.7 83.8 – – – – 20.1 4,691.8 4,472.5 219.3 20.8 357.5 19
88.2 4.4 83.8 – – – – 24.4 4,685.6 4,465.5 220.0 20.8 358.4 26
90.8 5.5 85.4 – – – – 34.0 4,675.3 4,454.8 220.5 20.8 348.2 Aug. 2
87.1 1.8 85.4 – – – – 27.9 4,675.6 4,455.3 220.3 20.8 351.7 9
87.2 1.9 85.4 – – – – 29.8 4,658.2 4,438.9 219.2 20.8 354.0 16
88.2 2.9 85.4 – – 0.0 – 29.8 4,658.4 4,438.6 219.8 20.8 362.9 23
90.2 4.0 86.2 – – – – 35.8 4,657.0 4,436.3 220.7 20.8 371.3 30
88.1 1.8 86.2 – – – – 36.3 4,649.0 4,427.9 221.0 20.8 363.7 Sep. 6
88.3 2.1 86.2 – – 0.0 – 32.0 4,641.0 4,418.7 222.3 20.8 362.1 13
88.2 1.9 86.2 – – 0.0 – 32.4 4,631.9 4,408.2 223.8 20.8 356.5 20
52.4 12.4 39.9 – – 0.0 – 35.7 4,633.3 4,407.7 225.6 20.8 358.5 27
48.0 8.1 39.9 – – 0.0 – 33.0 4,624.2 4,396.9 227.3 20.8 359.4 Oct. 4
46.7 6.8 39.9 – – – – 35.6 4,622.1 4,393.8 228.2 20.8 361.9 11
49.5 9.6 39.9 – – – – 33.6 4,603.8 4,374.9 228.9 20.8 366.7 18
49.9 10.0 39.9 – – 0.0 – 29.2 4,596.0 4,365.1 230.9 20.8 362.3 25
51.3 11.4 39.9 – – – – 28.1 4,585.3 4,354.6 230.7 20.8 365.5 Nov. 1
49.8 9.9 39.9 – – – – 25.8 4,587.7 4,353.8 233.9 20.8 353.9 8
49.2 9.2 39.9 – – 0.1 – 30.4 4,577.4 4,341.4 236.0 20.8 350.1 15
50.3 10.4 39.9 – – 0.0 – 25.2 4,580.4 4,340.7 239.7 20.8 352.3 22
52.6 10.4 42.2 – – – – 26.1 4,559.9 4,318.9 241.0 20.8 356.7 29
48.8 6.7 42.2 – – – – 27.9 4,546.2 4,304.6 241.6 20.8 351.9 Dec. 6
47.0 4.9 42.2 – – – – 27.7 4,546.1 4,298.7 247.4 20.8 355.2 13
25.2 8.0 17.2 – – 0.1 – 37.3 4,539.7 4,290.6 249.1 20.8 363.1 20
26.1 8.9 17.2 – – 0.0 – 42.7 4,539.9 4,290.5 249.4 20.8 370.3 27
34.2 17.0 17.2 – – – – 29.2 4,533.0 4,283.2 249.8 20.4 365.7 2025 Jan. 3
27.2 10.0 17.2 – – – – 30.8 4,533.8 4,282.1 251.7 20.4 365.4 10
Deutsche Bundesbank
21.7 0.4 21.3 – – – – 11.3 955.5 955.5 – 4.4 1,130.6 2024 June 21
14.5 1.5 13.0 – – – – 10.4 955.5 955.5 – 4.4 1,133.9 28
13.7 0.6 13.0 – – 0.1 – 9.9 953.3 953.3 – 4.4 1,156.9 July 5
13.7 0.8 13.0 – – 0.0 – 9.4 952.0 952.0 – 4.4 1,154.7 12
13.5 0.5 13.0 – – – – 6.1 950.5 950.5 – 4.4 1,115.6 19
13.6 0.6 13.0 – – – – 8.8 950.7 950.7 – 4.4 1,111.3 26
14.2 1.0 13.2 – – – – 12.3 949.9 949.9 – 4.4 1,116.9 Aug. 2
13.6 0.4 13.2 – – – – 11.5 950.0 950.0 – 4.4 1,102.5 9
13.8 0.5 13.2 – – – – 11.2 940.5 940.5 – 4.4 1,116.9 16
13.8 0.6 13.2 – – 0.0 – 12.8 939.8 939.8 – 4.4 1,086.8 23
14.5 0.9 13.6 – – – – 13.0 939.5 939.5 – 4.4 1,120.6 30
14.0 0.4 13.6 – – – – 13.6 939.3 939.3 – 4.4 1,096.8 Sep. 6
13.8 0.2 13.6 – – 0.0 – 12.1 933.6 933.6 – 4.4 1,095.1 13
13.8 0.2 13.6 – – 0.0 – 11.9 932.6 932.6 – 4.4 1,098.2 20
8.8 1.1 7.6 – – 0.0 – 11.8 932.8 932.8 – 4.4 1,095.4 27
8.2 0.5 7.6 – – 0.0 – 11.4 928.9 928.9 – 4.4 1,119.6 Oct. 4
8.2 0.6 7.6 – – – – 11.9 928.8 928.8 – 4.4 1,133.9 11
10.0 2.4 7.6 – – 0.0 – 11.2 919.5 919.5 – 4.4 1,117.4 18
10.2 2.6 7.6 – – 0.0 – 9.7 919.3 919.3 – 4.4 1,117.1 25
10.7 2.6 8.0 – – – – 8.6 919.3 919.3 – 4.4 1,110.3 Nov. 1
10.2 2.2 8.0 – – – – 9.0 919.5 919.5 – 4.4 1,126.0 8
10.1 1.9 8.0 – – 0.1 – 9.4 918.1 918.1 – 4.4 1,121.3 15
10.1 2.1 8.0 – – 0.0 – 7.1 917.8 917.8 – 4.4 1,117.8 22
11.6 2.4 9.2 – – 0.0 – 9.3 917.6 917.6 – 4.4 1,114.5 29
10.6 1.4 9.2 – – – – 8.3 916.8 916.8 – 4.4 1,116.7 Dec. 6
9.8 0.6 9.2 – – – – 8.7 912.1 912.1 – 4.4 1,126.1 13
4.3 0.7 3.5 – – 0.1 – 9.1 912.0 912.0 – 4.4 1,110.2 20
4.4 0.9 3.5 – – 0.0 – 9.5 912.0 912.0 – 4.4 1,107.0 27
5.5 2.0 3.5 – – – – 5.4 910.9 910.9 – 4.0 1,105.3 2025 Jan. 3
4.1 0.6 3.5 – – – – 7.2 910.3 910.3 – 4.0 1,105.5 10

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
18•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
2. Liabilities *
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to
monetary policy operations denominated in euroLiabilities to
other euro area residents
denominated in euro
As at
reporting
date 
Total
liabilitiesBanknotes
in circu-
lation  1 TotalCurrent
accounts
(covering
the
minimum
reserve
system)Deposit
facilityFixed-
term
depositsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsDeposits
related to
margin
callsOther
liabilities
to euro 
area credit
institutions
deno-
minated
in euroDebt
certifi-
cates
issued TotalGeneral
govern-
mentOther
liabilities
Eurosystem 3
2024 June 21 6,536.8 1,555.7 3,345.0 152.3 3,192.8 – – – 33.3 – 188.6 111.8 76.8
28 6,522.0 1,559.9 3,237.5 170.2 3,067.3 – – – 36.1 – 205.1 125.7 79.4
July 5 6,497.7 1,562.2 3,255.2 160.8 3,094.3 – – – 33.7 – 193.3 115.9 77.4
12 6,494.5 1,563.0 3,260.4 154.0 3,106.4 – – – 32.8 – 195.3 117.7 77.7
19 6,478.3 1,563.4 3,223.4 192.3 3,031.2 – – – 32.1 – 202.8 125.0 77.8
26 6,475.5 1,564.1 3,218.5 186.4 3,032.1 – – – 32.6 – 211.8 132.6 79.3
Aug. 2 6,468.7 1,566.1 3,224.7 159.7 3,065.1 – – 0.0 35.4 – 199.5 119.9 79.6
9 6,462.2 1,567.1 3,244.2 157.0 3,087.2 – – 0.0 33.8 – 192.5 114.3 78.2
16 6,449.2 1,567.2 3,232.9 155.0 3,077.9 – – 0.0 32.7 – 186.5 110.4 76.1
23 6,459.1 1,563.3 3,232.8 156.0 3,076.8 – – – 33.7 – 192.8 116.3 76.5
30 6,473.1 1,563.1 3,205.7 167.3 3,038.4 – – – 32.8 – 214.8 137.8 77.0
Sep. 6 6,456.6 1,562.6 3,216.5 155.6 3,060.9 – – – 34.9 – 207.2 123.4 83.8
13 6,442.5 1,561.5 3,220.9 204.6 3,016.3 – – – 31.4 – 200.2 118.2 82.1
20 6,428.5 1,559.5 3,199.9 168.4 3,031.4 – – – 32.4 – 201.6 116.0 85.6
27 6,398.4 1,560.9 3,147.0 156.6 2,990.4 – – – 32.5 – 209.5 121.0 88.6
Oct. 4 6,438.8 1,561.9 3,149.3 154.8 2,994.5 – – – 31.6 – 207.0 122.7 84.4
11 6,441.6 1,560.5 3,163.5 154.8 3,008.7 – – – 32.6 – 197.3 112.8 84.5
18 6,429.1 1,558.8 3,131.3 192.7 2,938.6 – – – 33.5 – 199.4 113.0 86.5
25 6,414.4 1,558.8 3,124.2 175.9 2,948.4 – – – 34.6 – 192.8 109.8 83.0
Nov. 1 6,404.2 1,562.5 3,103.6 178.4 2,925.2 – – – 33.3 – 212.8 127.9 85.0
8 6,393.0 1,561.3 3,119.9 161.5 2,958.3 – – – 32.4 – 196.6 111.5 85.0
15 6,383.0 1,560.3 3,097.0 150.9 2,946.1 – – – 34.0 – 212.0 109.6 102.4
22 6,385.1 1,559.7 3,116.9 151.5 2,965.4 – – – 34.6 – 195.8 110.2 85.6
29 6,372.8 1,563.8 3,057.7 156.9 2,900.8 – – – 32.6 – 218.0 128.0 90.0
Dec. 6 6,352.0 1,568.3 3,066.2 166.2 2,900.0 – – – 31.0 – 200.6 115.5 85.0
13 6,353.2 1,571.4 3,070.1 203.4 2,866.7 – – – 30.6 – 190.6 109.0 81.6
20 6,344.8 1,581.7 3,042.2 197.7 2,844.5 – – – 27.8 – 182.3 100.5 81.8
27 6,357.2 1,587.8 3,060.3 172.8 2,887.5 – – – 27.1 – 196.3 113.5 82.8
2025 Jan. 3 6,412.6 1,585.4 3,073.9 149.9 2,924.0 – – – 20.7 – 179.9 100.0 79.9
10 6,407.2 1,577.2 3,118.4 145.6 2,972.8 – – – 22.4 – 171.2 94.1 77.2
Deutsche Bundesbank
2024 June 21 2,436.8 381.8 1,138.0 40.7 1,097.4 – – – 5.1 – 25.7 14.2 11.5
28 2,447.3 382.2 1,124.4 45.5 1,078.9 – – – 6.1 – 25.2 11.8 13.4
July 5 2,466.7 383.4 1,157.9 41.1 1,116.8 – – – 4.5 – 24.4 12.5 11.9
12 2,462.3 384.3 1,157.1 39.8 1,117.2 – – – 4.0 – 23.2 11.7 11.5
19 2,418.0 384.9 1,117.6 63.0 1,054.6 – – – 3.2 – 21.9 10.1 11.8
26 2,416.5 385.4 1,112.9 45.0 1,067.9 – – – 3.1 – 22.2 10.2 12.0
Aug. 2 2,425.8 384.2 1,116.4 44.7 1,071.7 – – 0.0 4.9 – 22.0 8.9 13.1
9 2,409.2 385.1 1,099.6 40.7 1,058.9 – – 0.0 4.9 – 22.1 9.8 12.3
16 2,413.9 385.2 1,096.8 40.2 1,056.6 – – 0.0 4.2 – 21.7 9.4 12.3
23 2,384.9 385.4 1,064.4 39.2 1,025.2 – – – 5.1 – 23.5 10.9 12.6
30 2,419.4 383.0 1,090.4 45.6 1,044.9 – – – 4.8 – 26.2 13.6 12.6
Sep. 6 2,395.3 383.8 1,070.3 40.0 1,030.2 – – – 5.9 – 28.9 16.9 12.0
13 2,385.9 384.4 1,067.2 69.8 997.5 – – – 4.3 – 22.9 11.1 11.8
20 2,388.4 384.6 1,066.0 41.9 1,024.2 – – – 5.4 – 24.9 13.1 11.9
27 2,380.7 386.1 1,054.9 41.5 1,013.5 – – – 4.7 – 26.0 13.1 12.9
Oct. 4 2,417.4 383.8 1,081.1 39.6 1,041.5 – – – 3.9 – 26.5 14.1 12.4
11 2,433.0 383.8 1,100.8 38.8 1,062.0 – – – 3.3 – 22.1 9.2 13.0
18 2,408.0 383.5 1,070.0 55.4 1,014.7 – – – 4.3 – 21.9 8.8 13.1
25 2,406.3 384.2 1,066.9 43.8 1,023.1 – – – 4.4 – 24.4 10.9 13.5
Nov. 1 2,397.6 382.9 1,061.3 58.9 1,002.3 – – – 3.3 – 22.8 9.0 13.8
8 2,413.5 382.9 1,078.4 42.1 1,036.3 – – – 3.1 – 23.2 9.8 13.4
15 2,407.7 383.2 1,071.6 38.4 1,033.3 – – – 3.3 – 23.6 10.1 13.5
22 2,402.4 383.2 1,066.4 37.8 1,028.6 – – – 3.6 – 25.8 9.8 16.0
29 2,403.0 383.1 1,060.6 42.0 1,018.6 – – – 4.1 – 24.4 9.0 15.4
Dec. 6 2,402.0 385.1 1,058.4 52.5 1,006.0 – – – 4.6 – 28.8 15.0 13.8
13 2,406.4 386.7 1,050.5 57.1 993.4 – – – 4.7 – 33.5 19.9 13.6
20 2,385.8 391.0 1,020.3 50.6 969.8 – – – 4.8 – 27.4 16.4 11.0
27 2,382.6 392.7 1,014.4 46.8 967.6 – – – 7.8 – 32.3 18.2 14.1
2025 Jan. 3 2,395.0 387.6 1,022.6 36.6 986.0 – – – 4.2 – 28.1 16.3 11.8
10 2,395.6 384.7 1,032.4 35.8 996.6 – – – 5.6 – 23.9 13.3 10.6
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet items
for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at marketrates at the end of the quarrter.  1 In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen
by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of
the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthy basis. The
counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an "Intra-Eurosystem liability related to

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
19•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Liabilities
to non-euro
area residents
denominated
in euroLiabilities
to euro area
residents
in foreign
currency TotalDeposits,
balances
and other
liabilitiesLiabilities
arising
from the
credit facility
under ERM IICounterpart
of special
drawing
rights allocated
by the IMFOther
liabilities  2Intra-
Eurosystem
liability
related to
euro
banknote
issue  1 
 
 
 
 
Revaluation
accountsCapital
and
reservesAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 3
206.0 15.3 5.0 5.0 – 178.5 206.7 – 702.9 99.7 2024 June 21
221.8 15.0 5.3 5.3 – 179.0 212.1 – 750.4 99.7 28
200.8 15.8 5.7 5.7 – 179.0 201.9 – 750.4 99.7 July 5
191.2 16.2 5.2 5.2 – 179.0 201.3 – 750.4 99.7 12
202.6 16.4 4.6 4.6 – 179.0 203.8 – 750.4 99.7 19
194.4 15.5 4.1 4.1 – 179.0 205.5 – 750.4 99.7 26
192.3 15.7 4.0 4.0 – 179.0 201.9 – 750.4 99.6 Aug. 2
175.6 15.7 3.6 3.6 – 179.0 200.7 – 750.4 99.6 9
178.1 15.6 2.6 2.6 – 179.0 204.6 – 750.4 99.6 16
180.4 15.5 2.1 2.1 – 179.0 209.5 – 750.4 99.6 23
191.9 14.8 2.4 2.4 – 179.0 218.4 – 750.4 99.6 30
176.3 15.7 2.2 2.2 – 179.0 212.1 – 750.4 99.6 Sep. 6
174.8 15.6 2.1 2.1 – 179.0 206.9 – 750.4 99.6 13
188.6 15.1 1.4 1.4 – 179.0 200.9 – 750.4 99.6 20
198.2 13.6 1.3 1.3 – 179.0 206.3 – 750.4 99.6 27
190.7 13.8 1.5 1.5 – 176.6 200.3 – 806.6 99.5 Oct. 4
183.9 14.0 1.6 1.6 – 176.6 205.5 – 806.6 99.5 11
198.2 14.3 1.4 1.4 – 176.6 209.5 – 806.6 99.5 18
199.9 14.3 2.4 2.4 – 176.6 204.8 – 806.6 99.5 25
191.1 12.7 1.5 1.5 – 176.6 204.1 – 806.6 99.5 Nov. 1
189.2 13.1 0.7 0.7 – 176.6 197.2 – 806.6 99.5 8
186.4 12.7 0.5 0.5 – 176.6 197.3 – 806.6 99.5 15
182.9 12.6 0.8 0.8 – 176.6 199.1 – 806.6 99.5 22
203.2 11.5 1.2 1.2 – 176.6 202.1 – 806.6 99.5 29
189.9 11.9 0.5 0.5 – 176.6 201.1 – 806.6 99.5 Dec. 6
194.2 11.4 0.5 0.5 – 176.6 201.8 – 806.6 99.5 13
208.9 11.2 0.6 0.6 – 176.6 207.4 – 806.6 99.5 20
179.2 11.2 0.6 0.6 – 176.6 212.2 – 806.6 99.5 27
187.8 11.2 0.6 0.6 – 182.8 206.0 – 872.3 92.0 2025 Jan. 3
153.9 11.9 1.1 1.1 – 182.8 203.7 – 872.5 92.0 10
Deutsche Bundesbank
52.5 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 46.1 22.0 545.7 216.6 3.2 2024 June 21
61.5 0.0 0.6 0.6 – 46.2 19.5 547.3 231.1 3.2 28
49.0 0.0 0.6 0.6 – 46.2 19.2 547.3 231.1 3.2 July 5
46.4 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 46.2 19.3 547.3 231.1 3.2 12
43.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.2 19.4 547.3 231.1 3.2 19
45.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.2 19.7 547.3 231.1 3.2 26
48.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.2 19.0 550.2 231.1 3.2 Aug. 2
47.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.2 19.1 550.2 231.1 3.2 9
55.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.2 19.8 550.2 231.1 3.2 16
56.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 46.2 19.8 550.2 231.1 3.2 23
59.2 0.0 0.5 0.5 – 46.2 20.4 554.4 231.1 3.2 30
51.0 0.0 0.3 0.3 – 46.2 20.4 554.4 231.1 3.2 Sep. 6
51.6 0.0 0.3 0.3 – 46.2 20.4 554.4 231.1 3.2 13
51.8 0.0 0.5 0.5 – 46.2 20.3 554.4 231.1 3.2 20
52.9 0.0 0.6 0.6 – 46.2 20.6 554.4 231.1 3.2 27
46.9 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 45.5 19.2 558.3 249.1 3.2 Oct. 4
47.4 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 45.5 19.3 558.3 249.1 3.2 11
52.4 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 45.5 19.5 558.3 249.1 3.2 18
49.4 0.0 1.2 1.2 – 45.5 19.7 558.3 249.1 3.2 25
49.1 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 45.5 19.2 561.3 249.1 3.2 Nov. 1
47.4 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 45.5 19.2 561.3 249.1 3.2 8
47.6 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 45.5 19.2 561.3 249.1 3.2 15
44.8 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 45.5 19.4 561.3 249.1 3.2 22
49.5 0.0 0.7 0.7 – 45.5 19.4 563.4 249.1 3.2 29
44.6 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 45.5 19.3 563.4 249.1 3.2 Dec. 6
50.4 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 45.5 19.5 563.4 249.1 3.2 13
61.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 45.5 19.6 563.4 249.1 3.2 20
54.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 45.5 19.7 563.4 249.1 3.2 27
48.4 0.0 – – – 47.1 19.4 567.2 267.3 3.2 2025 Jan. 3
44.2 0.0 0.5 0.5 – 47.1 19.4 567.2 267.3 3.2 10
euro banknote issue". The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on an monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the eurobanknotes allocated to the NCB according to the aforementioned accounting
procedure and the value of euro banknotes put into circulation is also disclosed as an
"Intra-Eurosystem claim/liability related to banknote issue".  2 For the Deutsche Bundes-
bank: including DEM banknotes still in circulation.  3 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
20•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Assets
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the 
to banks in the home country to banks in other Member States to non-banks in the home country 
Enterprises and house- 
holds   
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1Cash
in hand Total Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Total Total Loans
End of year or month 
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2018 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2019 8,311.0 43.4 2,230.1 1,759.8 1,493.5 266.3 470.4 327.6 142.8 4,020.1 3,584.9 3,168.7 2,864.9
2020 8,943.3 47.5 2,622.7 2,177.9 1,913.5 264.4 444.8 307.1 137.7 4,179.6 3,709.8 3,297.0 2,993.1
2021 9,172.2 49.7 2,789.6 2,333.0 2,069.6 263.4 456.6 324.4 132.2 4,350.4 3,860.4 3,468.8 3,147.6
2022 10,517.9 20.0 2,935.2 2,432.2 2,169.2 263.0 502.9 359.6 143.3 4,584.6 4,079.3 3,702.9 3,365.4
2023 10,321.0 18.7 2,884.4 2,349.7 2,081.8 267.9 534.7 374.6 160.1 4,651.2 4,109.2 3,729.7 3,395.7
2023 Feb. 10,760.9 18.0 3,085.7 2,541.4 2,274.9 266.5 544.3 390.6 153.8 4,614.2 4,094.2 3,714.7 3,381.3
Mar. 10,553.8 17.9 3,041.3 2,497.8 2,229.3 268.4 543.5 391.2 152.3 4,620.6 4,094.7 3,718.2 3,386.0
Apr. 10,564.3 18.9 3,047.7 2,507.0 2,237.3 269.7 540.7 384.5 156.2 4,630.5 4,096.8 3,721.7 3,390.4
May 10,653.7 18.2 3,091.2 2,550.3 2,279.7 270.6 541.0 383.4 157.5 4,642.2 4,103.4 3,733.0 3,400.9
June 10,577.7 17.7 2,967.0 2,434.5 2,166.3 268.2 532.5 371.5 161.0 4,646.7 4,108.0 3,734.5 3,397.1
July 10,743.2 17.2 3,002.4 2,456.4 2,188.8 267.6 546.0 384.8 161.2 4,651.1 4,114.5 3,738.2 3,402.0
Aug. 10,735.3 17.5 2,994.8 2,455.6 2,187.1 268.4 539.2 377.9 161.4 4,649.4 4,111.7 3,733.9 3,400.6
Sep. 10,737.5 18.0 2,916.4 2,371.6 2,106.3 265.3 544.8 382.8 162.0 4,649.8 4,113.1 3,735.7 3,401.7
Oct. 10,797.9 17.5 2,980.6 2,430.9 2,165.6 265.3 549.7 387.7 162.1 4,653.7 4,116.8 3,736.3 3,401.6
Nov. 10,610.8 16.9 2,987.1 2,438.4 2,168.4 270.0 548.7 386.5 162.2 4,666.3 4,123.1 3,740.9 3,406.9
Dec. 10,321.0 18.7 2,884.4 2,349.7 2,081.8 267.9 534.7 374.6 160.1 4,651.2 4,109.2 3,729.7 3,395.7
2024 Jan. 10,454.3 16.3 2,979.1 2,420.8 2,144.5 276.3 558.2 394.5 163.7 4,665.4 4,113.3 3,729.2 3,393.3
Feb. 10,584.8 16.3 3,012.3 2,441.5 2,160.1 281.4 570.8 406.8 163.9 4,675.8 4,120.6 3,736.2 3,399.3
Mar. 10,509.6 17.6 2,957.6 2,389.6 2,105.8 283.8 568.1 403.0 165.1 4,695.4 4,126.2 3,741.0 3,401.3
Apr. 10,598.5 16.6 2,959.3 2,382.9 2,097.2 285.7 576.4 412.6 163.8 4,690.1 4,127.5 3,741.6 3,402.0
May 10,578.7 16.7 2,951.3 2,378.9 2,092.4 286.5 572.4 406.9 165.5 4,701.4 4,135.1 3,747.0 3,406.5
June 10,491.1 16.7 2,936.5 2,378.3 2,093.0 285.3 558.2 393.5 164.7 4,712.0 4,142.7 3,747.5 3,408.4
July 10,309.2 16.3 2,890.5 2,327.0 2,040.4 286.6 563.5 397.7 165.8 4,721.8 4,152.6 3,755.6 3,413.5
Aug. 10,269.1 17.0 2,889.6 2,327.5 2,039.7 287.8 562.1 394.7 167.5 4,729.7 4,158.4 3,758.2 3,415.9
Sep. 10,374.4 17.3 2,868.9 2,291.1 2,004.2 286.9 577.8 408.5 169.3 4,752.7 4,168.5 3,763.6 3,420.7
Oct. 10,490.7 18.1 2,864.5 2,283.4 1,994.9 288.5 581.1 409.1 172.0 4,749.4 4,168.9 3,762.0 3,419.0
Nov. 10,660.8 17.4 2,878.7 2,308.9 2,021.8 287.2 569.8 397.4 172.4 4,770.5 4,179.4 3,771.0 3,428.1
Changes 3
2015 –191.4 0.3 –18.2 –12.1 66.1 –78.2 – 6.1 6.6 –12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 –16.8 –58.1 – 49.2 – 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.0
2017 8.0 6.1 135.9 165.0 182.6 –17.6 –29.1 – 19.6 – 9.5 51.3 63.5 114.8 101.1
2018 101.8 8.5 –29.2 –49.7 –53.4 3.7 20.6 13.0 7.6 78.7 71.9 118.1 127.8
2019 483.4 2.8 20.7 – 3.8 – 2.3 – 1.5 24.5 16.9 7.5 161.8 130.5 148.2 140.9
2020 769.5 4.1 505.4 524.2 512.6 11.6 –18.8 – 16.2 – 2.6 161.0 130.0 132.3 132.2
2021 207.2 2.2 161.3 155.6 156.4 – 0.8 5.7 11.7 – 5.9 175.7 154.6 173.7 155.9
2022 1,170.5 –29.7 149.5 103.7 100.5 3.2 45.8 33.1 12.7 242.4 223.1 237.5 220.6
2023 –133.8 – 1.3 –41.5 –76.2 –86.2 10.0 34.7 17.2 17.5 84.5 44.6 40.5 41.3
2023 Mar. –195.2 – 0.1 –42.8 –43.2 –45.0 1.8 0.4 1.9 – 1.5 8.2 2.0 5.0 6.2
Apr. 16.7 1.0 7.7 9.8 8.1 1.7 – 2.1 – 6.0 3.9 11.0 3.0 4.2 5.1
May 91.9 – 0.7 41.9 42.2 41.3 0.9 – 0.2 – 1.6 1.3 12.3 6.8 11.5 10.6
June –65.9 – 0.5 –121.0 –113.5 –112.5 – 1.1 – 7.5 – 11.0 3.5 4.7 5.5 2.5 – 1.7
July 170.6 – 0.5 34.6 22.2 22.7 – 0.6 12.4 12.2 0.2 6.0 7.6 4.7 5.8
Aug. –15.1 0.3 – 7.6 – 1.1 – 1.9 0.8 – 6.5 – 6.6 0.1 – 0.5 – 2.4 – 3.9 – 1.0
Sep. 1.6 0.6 –78.5 –83.9 –80.8 – 3.1 5.3 4.7 0.7 1.6 2.3 2.7 2.0
Oct. 68.3 – 0.5 64.7 59.5 59.5 0.0 5.1 5.1 0.1 5.1 4.6 1.5 0.9
Nov. –174.8 – 0.6 8.2 7.9 3.2 4.7 0.3 0.3 0.0 13.7 7.3 6.4 7.2
Dec. –286.4 1.8 –102.9 –89.1 –86.8 – 2.3 –13.8 – 11.6 – 2.2 –13.7 –12.3 –10.1 –10.1
2024 Jan. 123.8 – 2.4 90.9 68.6 61.1 7.6 22.3 18.9 3.3 15.1 5.4 0.8 0.1
Feb. 132.1 0.0 33.5 20.9 15.7 5.3 12.5 12.3 0.2 11.2 7.4 7.3 6.3
Mar. –75.2 1.3 –55.0 –52.0 –54.3 2.4 – 3.0 – 3.9 0.9 20.1 6.2 5.5 2.8
Apr. 86.9 – 1.1 1.5 – 6.7 – 8.6 1.9 8.2 9.2 – 1.1 – 3.8 1.9 1.4 1.2
May –11.7 0.2 – 7.0 – 3.7 – 4.6 0.9 – 3.3 – 5.0 1.7 12.5 8.4 6.3 5.5
June –95.0 – 0.0 –16.0 – 1.1 1.0 – 2.1 –14.9 – 14.2 – 0.6 11.0 7.9 0.8 2.1
July –177.5 – 0.4 –43.7 –49.9 –51.0 1.1 6.1 5.6 0.6 12.1 11.6 9.7 6.5
Aug. –32.9 0.6 0.1 1.1 – 0.1 1.1 – 1.0 – 2.6 1.7 9.4 6.4 3.2 3.2
Sep. 108.9 0.4 –20.0 –36.1 –35.3 – 0.7 16.0 14.3 1.7 23.9 11.6 7.0 6.4
Oct. 110.1 0.8 – 0.5 – 2.5 – 4.0 1.5 1.9 – 0.7 2.7 – 2.7 1.6 2.4 2.1
Nov. 174.3 – 0.7 14.2 25.5 26.9 – 1.4 –11.3 – 11.7 0.5 22.4 11.4 10.5 10.8
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.  1 See
footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
21•
IV. Banks
euro area
to non-banks in other Member States 
Claims on non-euro area
residents
 
  
General governmentEnterprises and
households 
General government
 
Securities Total Loans 
Securities  2Total Totalof which:
Loans Total Loans 
Securities Totalof which:
LoansOther
assets  1 Period
End of year or month
276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016
308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 2017
297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2 2018
303.8 416.2 254.7 161.6 435.2 312.6 199.0 122.6 29.4 93.2 1,035.8 777.5 981.5 2019
303.9 412.8 252.3 160.5 469.8 327.5 222.2 142.3 29.7 112.7 1,003.2 751.2 1,090.3 2020
321.2 391.6 245.1 146.5 490.1 362.7 244.0 127.4 28.4 99.0 1,094.2 853.3 888.3 2021
337.5 376.4 248.0 128.4 505.3 384.9 270.2 120.4 30.8 89.6 1,137.2 882.9 1,841.0 2022
334.0 379.5 254.3 125.2 542.0 411.1 283.5 130.9 28.4 102.5 1,134.5 876.1 1,632.3 2023
333.5 379.5 248.2 131.3 520.0 393.3 279.2 126.8 31.3 95.4 1,167.6 904.4 1,875.3 2023 Feb.
332.2 376.5 248.9 127.6 526.0 397.5 275.7 128.4 30.9 97.5 1,168.5 902.6 1,705.4 Mar.
331.2 375.1 250.9 124.2 533.7 405.8 280.9 128.0 32.3 95.7 1,149.9 883.9 1,717.3 Apr.
332.1 370.5 249.8 120.7 538.7 407.7 284.6 131.0 31.9 99.1 1,177.7 912.0 1,724.4 May
337.4 373.4 248.7 124.7 538.7 403.1 279.6 135.6 31.0 104.5 1,150.6 886.7 1,795.7 June
336.2 376.4 252.1 124.3 536.6 407.3 282.8 129.3 30.7 98.7 1,156.3 895.0 1,916.3 July
333.3 377.9 249.5 128.4 537.7 404.5 282.9 133.2 31.1 102.1 1,157.7 899.2 1,915.9 Aug.
334.1 377.4 252.0 125.4 536.7 404.7 282.5 132.0 32.0 100.0 1,163.8 902.7 1,989.5 Sep.
334.7 380.5 255.1 125.4 537.0 405.6 282.9 131.4 32.0 99.4 1,165.8 909.5 1,980.1 Oct.
334.0 382.2 254.4 127.8 543.2 412.1 288.2 131.1 30.9 100.2 1,153.0 895.0 1,787.6 Nov.
334.0 379.5 254.3 125.2 542.0 411.1 283.5 130.9 28.4 102.5 1,134.5 876.1 1,632.3 Dec.
335.9 384.2 256.3 127.9 552.0 414.9 287.1 137.1 28.8 108.3 1,167.8 911.4 1,625.8 2024 Jan.
336.9 384.5 254.8 129.6 555.2 420.3 293.8 134.9 28.5 106.4 1,205.6 942.8 1,674.7 Feb.
339.7 385.2 257.2 128.0 569.2 426.8 294.6 142.5 28.1 114.4 1,211.2 942.8 1,627.7 Mar.
339.7 385.8 259.9 126.0 562.7 422.4 294.1 140.3 28.8 111.4 1,218.9 947.8 1,713.6 Apr.
340.5 388.1 259.6 128.5 566.3 429.9 296.6 136.4 27.8 108.6 1,247.8 977.8 1,661.5 May
339.0 395.2 262.6 132.7 569.3 425.5 293.2 143.8 28.0 115.8 1,237.3 963.9 1,588.6 June
342.2 397.0 263.1 133.9 569.2 425.5 295.9 143.7 27.5 116.2 1,230.3 956.4 1,450.3 July
342.2 400.2 261.9 138.3 571.3 429.2 301.1 142.1 27.5 114.6 1,236.5 961.1 1,396.4 Aug.
342.9 404.9 264.2 140.7 584.2 433.0 304.0 151.2 27.9 123.3 1,279.6 996.9 1,455.9 Sep.
343.0 406.8 270.5 136.3 580.5 435.1 305.0 145.4 27.1 118.3 1,284.7 997.7 1,574.0 Oct.
342.8 408.5 270.8 137.7 591.1 450.2 309.9 140.9 26.9 113.9 1,324.3 1,036.7 1,669.9 Nov.
Changes 3
11.5 – 3.9 – 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 – 3.7 – 1.0 – 2.8 –88.3 –101.0 –150.1 2015
7.8 –35.4 –12.1 –23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 – 4.2 – 0.9 – 3.3 51.4 55.0 –51.4 2016
13.7 –51.3 –22.8 –28.5 –12.2 – 3.4 4.0 – 8.7 0.1 – 8.9 –12.3 – 6.7 –173.1 2017
– 9.8 –46.2 –19.1 –27.0 6.8 18.2 18.6 –11.4 – 1.5 – 9.9 29.0 18.9 14.8 2018
7.3 –17.7 – 8.6 – 9.1 31.3 29.5 26.9 1.7 0.0 1.7 –32.1 –33.3 330.3 2019
0.2 – 2.4 – 1.7 – 0.7 31.0 30.6 20.9 0.3 – 0.4 0.7 – 9.7 – 8.2 108.8 2020
17.8 –19.1 – 6.1 –13.1 21.1 35.5 22.6 –14.3 – 1.1 –13.2 71.7 84.9 –203.7 2021
16.9 –14.4 1.9 –16.3 19.3 20.7 24.4 – 1.4 2.6 – 3.9 15.0 – 0.8 793.3 2022
– 0.9 4.1 6.4 – 2.3 39.9 28.3 15.1 11.7 – 2.4 14.1 42.6 34.1 –218.1 2023
– 1.2 – 3.0 0.8 – 3.7 6.1 4.6 – 3.0 1.5 – 0.4 1.9 9.6 6.5 –170.1 2023 Mar.
– 1.0 – 1.2 2.1 – 3.3 8.0 8.5 5.4 – 0.5 1.4 – 1.9 –14.9 –15.4 11.9 Apr.
0.9 – 4.7 – 1.2 – 3.5 5.4 2.1 3.9 3.4 – 0.4 3.7 28.3 28.1 10.1 May
4.2 3.0 – 1.1 4.1 – 0.9 – 5.5 – 5.9 4.6 – 0.9 5.5 – 9.4 – 8.3 60.3 June
– 1.2 3.0 3.4 – 0.4 – 1.7 4.4 3.4 – 6.1 – 0.3 – 5.7 10.3 12.6 120.4 July
– 2.8 1.5 – 2.6 4.1 1.9 – 1.9 1.0 3.8 0.5 3.4 – 5.1 – 1.9 – 2.2 Aug.
0.7 – 0.3 2.6 – 2.9 – 0.7 0.4 – 0.3 – 1.1 0.9 – 2.0 6.6 3.7 71.3 Sep.
0.7 3.0 3.1 – 0.0 0.5 1.1 0.5 – 0.5 0.0 – 0.6 3.9 8.3 – 5.0 Oct.
– 0.8 0.9 – 1.5 2.4 6.4 6.7 5.8 – 0.3 – 1.2 0.9 – 3.0 – 5.3 –193.1 Nov.
– 0.1 – 2.2 0.7 – 2.8 – 1.4 – 0.9 – 4.4 – 0.5 – 2.5 2.0 –15.2 –15.5 –156.4 Dec.
0.7 4.6 2.0 2.6 9.7 3.5 3.4 6.2 0.4 5.8 25.3 27.8 – 5.1 2024 Jan.
1.0 0.1 – 1.7 1.8 3.9 6.0 7.4 – 2.1 – 0.3 – 1.8 38.2 31.8 49.2 Feb.
2.7 0.7 2.4 – 1.6 13.9 6.4 1.0 7.6 – 0.4 7.9 5.4 – 0.2 –47.1 Mar.
0.1 0.6 2.6 – 2.0 – 5.8 – 4.0 – 0.4 – 1.8 0.7 – 2.5 4.6 1.8 85.7 Apr.
0.8 2.1 – 0.4 2.5 4.1 8.0 2.9 – 3.9 – 1.1 – 2.8 34.2 34.8 –51.5 May
– 1.4 7.1 3.0 4.2 3.1 – 4.3 – 3.6 7.4 0.2 7.2 –17.0 –19.8 –73.0 June
3.1 2.0 0.8 1.1 0.5 0.5 3.3 – 0.0 – 0.5 0.4 – 3.4 – 3.8 –142.0 July
– 0.0 3.2 – 1.2 4.4 3.0 4.5 5.9 – 1.6 0.0 – 1.6 6.9 5.5 –50.0 Aug.
0.6 4.5 2.3 2.2 12.4 3.3 2.3 9.1 0.4 8.7 46.1 39.1 58.6 Sep.
0.2 – 0.8 3.6 – 4.4 – 4.3 1.5 0.5 – 5.8 – 0.8 – 5.0 – 5.4 – 9.5 118.0 Oct.
– 0.2 0.9 – 0.5 1.4 11.0 15.5 5.0 – 4.5 – 0.2 – 4.4 39.5 38.9 98.9 Nov.
of equalisation claims.  3 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures
(see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
22•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Liabilities
€ billion
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area   Deposits of banks (MFIs)
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks 
of banks
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1 Totalin the
home
countryin other
Member
States Total Total 
Overnight Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Total 
Overnight
End of year or month 
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2018 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2019 8,311.0 1,242.8 1,010.4 232.4 3,778.1 3,649.8 2,230.9 843.7 261.7 575.1 540.5 116.3 54.6
2020 8,943.3 1,493.2 1,237.0 256.3 4,021.6 3,836.7 2,508.4 767.8 227.1 560.5 533.2 135.1 57.0
2021 9,172.2 1,628.6 1,338.6 289.9 4,129.9 3,931.8 2,649.3 721.3 203.9 561.2 537.1 153.8 70.7
2022 10,517.9 1,618.6 1,231.6 387.0 4,343.5 4,093.8 2,712.1 848.6 353.7 533.2 510.2 180.5 84.1
2023 10,321.0 1,489.3 1,099.9 389.4 4,419.1 4,174.5 2,530.0 1,198.7 693.4 445.9 395.3 186.3 75.9
2023 Feb. 10,760.9 1,633.5 1,226.0 407.5 4,391.4 4,113.2 2,670.6 926.7 428.4 515.9 490.8 191.2 97.2
Mar. 10,553.8 1,618.0 1,210.4 407.6 4,368.3 4,092.1 2,625.3 959.7 462.3 507.2 480.5 197.9 98.8
Apr. 10,564.3 1,632.8 1,227.7 405.1 4,370.1 4,099.8 2,620.9 980.3 482.3 498.6 470.4 199.5 93.6
May 10,653.7 1,622.7 1,229.8 392.9 4,384.2 4,108.2 2,613.0 1,004.7 504.1 490.6 460.2 201.6 97.9
June 10,577.7 1,530.6 1,149.6 381.0 4,378.1 4,110.1 2,586.3 1,040.5 541.1 483.3 450.2 196.6 90.9
July 10,743.2 1,563.0 1,159.8 403.2 4,382.4 4,116.2 2,569.6 1,070.7 572.0 475.9 439.9 197.0 90.2
Aug. 10,735.3 1,549.2 1,162.1 387.0 4,388.3 4,124.6 2,555.7 1,101.4 603.4 467.5 428.7 191.6 87.5
Sep. 10,737.5 1,500.0 1,112.7 387.3 4,384.5 4,126.8 2,545.8 1,119.2 620.4 461.8 420.1 193.4 89.5
Oct. 10,797.9 1,530.0 1,132.1 398.0 4,398.0 4,135.1 2,528.3 1,151.4 653.5 455.4 410.8 198.1 88.2
Nov. 10,610.8 1,547.2 1,136.6 410.5 4,414.1 4,158.1 2,538.2 1,171.5 670.5 448.3 400.3 197.0 89.8
Dec. 10,321.0 1,489.3 1,099.9 389.4 4,419.1 4,174.5 2,530.0 1,198.7 693.4 445.9 395.3 186.3 75.9
2024 Jan. 10,454.3 1,538.7 1,125.8 412.8 4,411.2 4,162.0 2,484.1 1,238.6 733.2 439.4 386.3 189.6 81.6
Feb. 10,584.8 1,553.3 1,134.8 418.5 4,408.0 4,160.5 2,466.4 1,259.7 753.8 434.4 378.9 191.6 82.1
Mar. 10,509.6 1,495.3 1,083.4 411.9 4,436.4 4,186.1 2,467.5 1,288.2 781.6 430.3 373.2 191.5 82.7
Apr. 10,598.5 1,520.0 1,094.3 425.7 4,435.0 4,186.5 2,463.4 1,297.4 789.0 425.7 367.7 191.0 84.1
May 10,578.7 1,503.4 1,088.4 415.0 4,464.9 4,209.9 2,484.8 1,303.0 793.5 422.2 363.7 196.0 88.3
June 10,491.1 1,479.3 1,067.5 411.8 4,469.5 4,211.8 2,481.9 1,311.8 800.8 418.1 359.1 197.6 92.0
July 10,309.2 1,464.5 1,055.3 409.2 4,462.6 4,214.6 2,484.4 1,316.2 805.0 414.0 355.0 191.4 83.2
Aug. 10,269.1 1,426.3 1,025.0 401.3 4,522.7 4,269.7 2,535.4 1,323.2 812.1 411.2 352.1 194.8 85.4
Sep. 10,374.4 1,410.5 1,004.3 406.3 4,529.5 4,275.3 2,532.9 1,333.1 821.7 409.3 349.4 199.9 89.4
Oct. 10,490.7 1,427.9 1,001.9 426.0 4,539.0 4,281.9 2,542.8 1,331.5 819.0 407.6 346.9 197.6 88.6
Nov. 10,660.8 1,453.5 1,027.4 426.1 4,589.8 4,329.2 2,599.5 1,324.6 808.2 405.1 345.1 206.4 89.6
Changes 4
2015 –191.4 –62.1 –50.3 –11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 –37.0 –10.1 –11.3 4.2 – 0.4 – 0.3
2016 184.3 –31.6 – 2.2 –29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 –11.1 1.4 – 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.9
2017 8.0 30.6 14.8 15.8 124.2 107.7 145.8 –32.5 –15.3 – 5.6 1.5 16.4 5.8
2018 101.8 –20.1 –25.7 5.6 112.4 114.7 137.7 –18.8 – 6.5 – 4.3 1.2 – 4.3 2.3
2019 483.4 12.6 –10.0 22.6 132.1 120.0 154.1 –30.6 – 6.6 – 3.4 – 0.6 10.6 8.7
2020 769.5 340.0 317.0 23.0 244.9 188.4 277.6 –74.7 –34.9 –14.5 – 7.2 18.7 1.8
2021 207.2 133.4 103.4 30.0 107.3 96.2 141.4 –45.8 –23.3 0.6 3.9 16.6 13.6
2022 1,170.5 –15.6 –105.9 90.3 208.9 165.9 60.6 132.8 148.1 –27.5 –26.3 18.4 12.8
2023 –133.8 –133.9 –138.4 4.5 89.6 93.4 –172.3 347.9 338.5 –82.3 –109.9 7.1 – 7.1
2023 Mar. –195.2 –13.4 –14.7 1.3 –21.7 –20.0 –44.1 32.8 33.5 – 8.7 –10.3 7.1 1.8
Apr. 16.7 15.5 17.5 – 1.9 2.4 8.1 – 4.1 20.8 20.2 – 8.6 –10.1 1.8 – 5.1
May 91.9 –10.1 2.1 –12.1 13.1 8.4 – 7.9 24.3 21.7 – 8.0 –10.2 1.1 4.2
June –65.9 –90.3 –79.4 –11.0 – 6.3 1.5 –26.3 35.0 36.1 – 7.3 – 9.9 – 4.7 – 6.9
July 170.6 31.5 10.4 21.1 4.9 6.5 –16.4 30.2 31.0 – 7.3 –10.3 0.6 – 0.7
Aug. –15.1 –13.3 2.8 –16.1 6.4 7.9 –13.6 30.0 30.7 – 8.5 –11.2 – 4.4 – 2.4
Sep. 1.6 –49.2 –49.4 0.2 – 3.9 2.2 – 9.9 17.8 17.3 – 5.7 – 8.6 1.8 1.9
Oct. 68.3 30.9 19.9 11.0 13.8 8.5 –17.4 32.3 33.1 – 6.4 – 9.4 4.7 – 1.2
Nov. –174.8 18.9 5.1 13.8 17.5 23.9 10.6 20.4 17.2 – 7.1 –10.5 – 0.7 2.1
Dec. –286.4 –67.4 –47.2 –20.3 16.0 27.3 3.4 26.4 23.1 – 2.5 – 5.0 –10.5 –13.8
2024 Jan. 123.8 48.2 25.6 22.5 – 8.9 –13.2 –46.4 39.8 39.6 – 6.5 – 9.1 3.0 5.5
Feb. 132.1 14.8 9.0 5.8 – 3.2 – 1.5 –17.7 21.1 20.7 – 5.0 – 7.3 2.0 0.4
Mar. –75.2 –57.9 –51.4 – 6.6 28.4 25.6 1.2 28.5 27.8 – 4.1 – 5.7 – 0.1 0.6
Apr. 86.9 24.2 10.9 13.4 – 1.7 0.2 – 4.3 9.1 7.3 – 4.6 – 5.5 – 0.6 1.3
May –11.7 –15.1 – 5.1 –10.1 30.5 23.9 21.8 5.5 4.4 – 3.5 – 4.0 5.1 4.3
June –95.0 –23.3 –19.2 – 4.1 2.0 – 0.5 – 3.3 6.9 7.1 – 4.2 – 4.5 1.4 3.6
July –177.5 – 9.0 – 8.0 – 1.0 – 6.5 3.1 2.7 4.4 4.4 – 4.0 – 4.1 – 6.2 – 8.7
Aug. –32.9 – 5.9 1.7 – 7.7 28.5 23.1 19.0 7.0 7.0 – 2.9 – 2.9 3.8 2.5
Sep. 108.9 –15.2 –20.6 5.4 7.2 6.0 – 2.3 10.1 9.7 – 1.8 – 2.7 5.3 4.1
Oct. 110.1 15.5 – 2.9 18.4 8.2 5.1 9.3 – 2.6 – 3.1 – 1.7 – 2.5 – 2.7 – 1.0
Nov. 174.3 25.6 25.5 0.1 50.7 47.7 56.4 – 6.3 –10.7 – 2.5 – 1.8 8.8 1.1
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.
1 See footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Excluding deposits of central governments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
23•
IV. Banks
  Debt securities issued  3
in other Member States  2 Deposits of
central governments
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Totalof which:
domestic
central
govern-
mentsLiabilities
arising
from
repos with
non-banks
in the
euro areaMoney
market
fund
shares
issued  3 Totalof which:
with
maturities
of up to
2 years  3Liabilities
to non-
euro 
area
residentsCapital
and
reservesOther
Liabilities  1 Period
End of year or month
42.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 2016
63.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 2017
56.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7 2018
59.0 16.5 2.7 2.4 12.0 11.2 1.5 1.9 1,063.2 32.3 559.4 728.6 935.6 2019
75.6 30.6 2.6 2.3 49.8 48.6 9.4 2.5 1,056.9 21.2 617.6 710.8 1,031.3 2020
80.7 22.8 2.4 2.2 44.2 43.5 2.2 2.3 1,110.8 27.5 757.2 732.3 809.0 2021
94.3 32.4 2.2 2.0 69.2 66.8 3.4 2.7 1,185.1 40.8 800.4 747.2 1,817.1 2022
108.4 37.8 2.0 1.6 58.3 52.0 5.0 3.2 1,279.0 80.5 723.0 784.8 1,617.7 2023
91.8 30.0 2.2 1.9 87.0 82.5 5.0 2.4 1,221.5 55.6 901.8 724.9 1,880.4 2023 Feb.
97.0 28.5 2.1 1.9 78.2 73.3 4.7 2.6 1,231.2 64.6 863.1 734.8 1,731.0 Mar.
103.7 33.9 2.1 1.9 70.8 65.9 5.4 2.8 1,235.3 67.3 856.2 735.7 1,726.0 Apr.
101.6 30.7 2.1 1.8 74.4 62.4 6.0 2.6 1,257.3 72.3 888.2 746.9 1,745.8 May
103.6 32.5 2.0 1.8 71.4 64.0 4.8 2.6 1,253.9 75.7 853.4 749.6 1,804.7 June
104.8 33.2 2.0 1.7 69.2 61.5 6.5 2.9 1,262.0 76.3 855.0 757.2 1,914.3 July
102.0 32.4 2.0 1.7 72.2 61.5 5.8 3.0 1,271.3 83.5 840.0 765.2 1,912.5 Aug.
102.0 32.6 2.0 1.7 64.3 60.0 4.9 3.0 1,280.7 82.6 825.8 765.1 1,973.5 Sep.
107.9 37.8 2.0 1.6 64.8 59.7 6.2 2.9 1,288.5 84.7 843.9 755.9 1,972.3 Oct.
105.2 34.5 2.0 1.6 59.1 55.1 6.6 3.0 1,286.3 83.6 805.3 769.5 1,778.8 Nov.
108.4 37.8 2.0 1.6 58.3 52.0 5.0 3.2 1,279.0 80.5 723.0 784.8 1,617.7 Dec.
106.1 35.6 1.9 1.6 59.5 50.5 9.1 3.3 1,304.0 83.0 775.3 756.5 1,656.1 2024 Jan.
107.6 39.2 1.9 1.5 55.9 49.5 10.0 3.3 1,316.2 83.3 831.9 749.6 1,712.5 Feb.
106.8 37.5 1.9 1.5 58.8 49.9 9.1 3.5 1,320.0 82.7 834.2 756.2 1,655.0 Mar.
105.0 35.6 1.9 1.5 57.4 49.2 9.5 3.7 1,324.9 77.3 821.9 746.5 1,736.9 Apr.
105.8 34.8 1.9 1.5 59.0 49.5 8.7 3.8 1,327.0 75.7 832.8 756.7 1,681.4 May
103.8 33.3 1.9 1.4 60.1 49.5 9.3 4.0 1,327.0 79.4 825.3 786.7 1,590.0 June
106.3 36.2 1.9 1.4 56.6 49.1 10.1 4.2 1,316.5 76.0 780.4 790.0 1,480.9 July
107.5 37.9 1.9 1.4 58.3 49.1 12.7 4.6 1,320.2 77.6 772.8 789.8 1,420.1 Aug.
108.6 39.3 1.9 1.4 54.2 43.4 10.1 4.9 1,321.7 78.4 815.6 802.4 1,479.8 Sep.
107.2 38.8 1.9 1.4 59.6 43.6 9.4 4.9 1,326.0 73.8 783.1 817.2 1,583.2 Oct.
114.9 38.3 1.9 1.4 54.2 39.5 6.5 4.7 1,322.5 75.2 811.0 822.6 1,650.1 Nov.
Changes 4
– 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 – 0.4 – 1.9 – 1.0 – 0.0 –86.8 7.7 –30.3 28.0 –143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 2.2 – 1.2 – 0.3 – 1.1 8.6 – 1.3 116.1 26.4 –39.5 2016
10.8 4.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.1 – 0.3 – 3.3 – 8.5 –16.1 34.1 –162.3 2017
– 6.4 – 4.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 2.1 2.1 – 2.6 0.3 30.0 – 5.9 –36.0 7.4 10.3 2018
2.0 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.1 1.4 1.4 5.6 – 0.5 22.3 0.1 –47.9 30.0 329.1 2019
17.0 14.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 37.8 37.3 3.6 0.6 11.8 – 9.3 61.6 – 1.5 108.5 2020
3.1 – 8.0 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 5.5 – 5.0 – 7.9 0.3 40.6 6.9 124.9 16.6 –207.9 2021
5.8 8.5 – 0.3 – 0.2 24.6 23.0 1.2 0.4 67.2 12.6 45.6 5.0 857.7 2022
14.4 6.7 – 0.2 – 0.4 –10.9 –14.8 1.8 0.5 110.6 43.1 –55.7 43.3 –189.9 2023
5.3 – 1.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 8.8 – 9.2 – 0.3 0.3 13.6 9.2 –33.8 11.2 –151.2 2023 Mar.
6.9 5.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 7.4 – 7.4 0.7 0.1 5.7 2.7 – 4.9 1.8 – 4.7 Apr.
– 3.1 – 3.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 3.6 – 3.5 0.6 – 0.1 23.4 6.5 32.0 9.4 23.5 May
2.1 2.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 3.0 1.6 – 1.1 – 0.0 0.4 4.1 –28.3 3.6 56.2 June
1.2 0.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.1 – 2.5 1.7 0.3 10.2 0.7 4.2 8.1 109.7 July
– 2.1 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 2.9 – 0.0 – 0.7 0.1 7.0 7.1 –18.9 7.2 – 2.8 Aug.
– 0.1 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 7.9 – 1.5 – 0.9 0.1 10.3 0.0 –14.2 – 1.0 60.4 Sep.
5.9 5.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.6 – 0.3 1.4 – 0.1 8.3 2.2 19.1 – 4.6 – 0.4 Oct.
– 2.8 – 3.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 5.7 – 4.6 0.4 0.1 2.0 – 1.0 –32.8 14.8 –195.8 Nov.
3.3 3.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.8 – 3.1 – 1.6 0.1 – 5.6 – 3.0 –80.1 15.3 –163.0 Dec.
– 2.5 – 2.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.2 – 1.5 4.1 0.1 21.1 2.4 48.0 –29.3 40.5 2024 Jan.
1.5 3.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 3.6 – 1.0 0.8 0.0 12.5 0.2 56.7 – 6.4 57.0 Feb.
– 0.7 – 1.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 2.9 0.5 – 0.9 0.2 3.6 – 0.6 2.0 6.6 –57.1 Mar.
– 1.9 – 2.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 1.4 – 0.8 0.4 0.2 3.6 – 5.4 –14.2 –10.0 84.4 Apr.
0.8 – 0.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.5 0.3 – 0.8 0.1 4.2 – 1.6 13.9 10.7 –55.2 May
– 2.1 – 1.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.0 – 0.1 0.6 0.2 – 2.9 3.7 –11.2 29.5 –89.7 June
2.6 2.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 3.4 – 0.4 0.8 0.2 – 8.9 – 3.4 –41.2 3.7 –116.5 July
1.2 1.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.6 – 0.0 2.5 0.5 1.8 0.8 – 6.5 4.7 –58.5 Aug.
1.2 1.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 4.0 – 5.6 – 2.5 0.3 2.8 0.8 44.9 15.4 56.0 Sep.
– 1.7 – 0.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 5.8 0.7 – 0.8 0.1 – 0.1 – 4.7 –33.3 5.7 114.9 Oct.
7.7 – 0.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 5.7 – 4.4 – 2.8 – 0.2 – 2.0 2.9 27.9 3.9 71.2 Nov.
3 In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money
market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published togetherwith money market fund shares.  4 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
24•
IV. Banks
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Loans
End of
monthNumber of
reporting
institu-
tionsBalance
sheet
total  1Cash in
hand and
credit
balances
with
central
banks TotalBalances
and
loansSecurities
issued by
banks Totalfor
up to and
including
1 yearfor
more than
1 year BillsSecurities
issued by
non-banksPartici-
pating
interestsOther
assets  1
All categories of banks
2024 June 1,326 10,588.4 63.9 3,567.3 3,058.2 505.9 5,102.0 500.3 3,835.7 0.1 748.2 97.4 1,757.9
July 1,324 10,408.2 66.7 3,511.2 2,997.5 510.3 5,108.5 498.1 3,847.4 0.1 746.1 100.7 1,621.1
Aug. 1,315 10,379.0 63.4 3,519.8 3,003.5 512.8 5,116.3 494.9 3,855.8 0.1 748.1 101.1 1,578.5
Sep. 1,308 10,485.4 66.6 3,516.1 2,997.6 515.1 5,161.3 523.3 3,854.9 0.1 764.3 100.7 1,640.7
Oct. 1,303 10,599.7 69.0 3,508.5 2,986.5 518.5 5,163.8 519.6 3,864.8 0.1 760.8 100.4 1,758.1
Nov. 1,299 10,763.7 61.1 3,569.5 3,048.8 517.5 5,184.3 519.7 3,878.1 0.1 770.4 100.7 1,848.1
Commercial banks 6
2024 Oct. 236 4,898.6 25.6 1,672.5 1,568.1 103.6 1,722.7 357.4 1,065.4 0.1 290.9 33.1 1,444.6
Nov. 237 5,012.3 21.4 1,698.3 1,592.8 104.6 1,731.9 358.2 1,070.1 0.1 296.9 33.2 1,527.5
Big banks 7
2024 Oct. 3 2,299.4 10.8 711.5 665.1 46.4 790.6 175.7 447.3 0.0 164.0 24.6 761.9
Nov. 3 2,341.4 9.6 722.6 675.1 47.5 792.2 173.7 449.9 0.0 165.1 24.6 792.3
Regional banks and other commercial banks
2024 Oct. 125 2,128.0 10.5 670.6 616.3 53.8 776.1 134.8 519.5 0.1 117.1 7.6 663.2
Nov. 125 2,180.2 8.8 668.1 614.0 53.5 782.0 137.2 521.6 0.1 120.9 7.7 713.7
Branches of foreign banks
2024 Oct. 108 471.2 4.4 290.4 286.7 3.5 156.1 46.9 98.6 – 9.9 0.9 19.5
Nov. 109 490.7 3.0 307.6 303.8 3.5 157.7 47.3 98.5 – 11.0 0.9 21.5
Landesbanken
2024 Oct. 6 889.4 2.7 333.0 273.2 59.7 434.1 46.8 342.1 0.0 41.3 9.5 110.2
Nov. 6 894.1 2.1 331.7 272.6 59.0 436.8 47.1 342.7 0.0 42.9 9.5 114.0
Savings banks
2024 Oct. 349 1,562.0 22.3 268.5 148.0 120.4 1,229.0 55.0 1,005.0 – 169.0 16.8 25.3
Nov. 349 1,582.9 20.6 287.9 167.2 120.7 1,231.8 53.4 1,008.1 – 170.2 16.8 25.8
Credit cooperatives
2024 Oct. 674 1,195.0 13.4 219.7 109.5 109.9 907.9 35.4 755.0 0.0 117.6 20.6 33.3
Nov. 669 1,202.2 11.8 226.3 116.9 109.1 910.5 35.2 757.4 0.0 117.9 20.8 32.7
Mortgage banks
2024 Oct. 7 219.4 0.1 17.2 9.7 7.6 196.8 2.8 180.8 – 13.0 0.1 5.1
Nov. 7 221.0 0.1 18.9 11.4 7.6 196.6 2.8 181.0 – 12.7 0.2 5.3
Building and loan associations
2024 Oct. 13 261.5 0.2 40.7 25.2 15.5 216.2 1.3 194.3 . 20.7 0.2 4.2
Nov. 13 261.0 0.2 39.8 24.5 15.3 216.5 1.3 194.5 . 20.7 0.2 4.3
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2024 Oct. 18 1,573.9 4.6 956.8 852.9 101.8 457.0 20.9 322.3 – 108.4 20.0 135.4
Nov. 18 1,590.1 4.9 966.6 863.3 101.4 460.2 21.7 324.3 0.0 109.1 20.0 138.4
Memo item:    Foreign banks 8
2024 Oct. 137 2,364.9 11.6 815.7 771.7 43.2 749.8 168.1 434.4 0.1 140.5 2.7 785.1
Nov. 138 2,445.6 9.3 824.5 779.9 43.8 755.8 170.5 434.1 0.1 146.6 2.8 853.2
of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2024 Oct. 29 1,893.7 7.2 525.3 485.0 39.7 593.7 121.3 335.8 0.1 130.6 1.9 765.6
Nov. 29 1,954.9 6.3 516.9 476.1 40.2 598.1 123.1 335.6 0.1 135.6 1.9 831.7
* Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified as
MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3.  1 Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative financial
instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the meaning ofSection 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handelsgesetzbuch) read
in conjunction with Section 35 (1) number 1a of the Credit Institution Accounting
Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute) are classified
under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting date. Trading
portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Series Banking statistics, in
Tables I.1 to I.3.  2 For building and loan associations: including deposits under savings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
25•
IV. Banks
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4
TotalSight
depositsTime
deposits TotalSight
depositsfor
up to and
including
1 yearfor
more
than
1 year  2Memo
item:
Liabilities
arising
from
repos  3 Totalof which:
At 3
months'
noticeBank
savings
bondsBearer
debt
securities
out-
standing  5Capital
including
published
reserves,
partici-
pation
rights
capital,
funds for
general
banking
risksOther
liabi-
lities  1End of
month
All categories of banks
2,100.8 708.1 1,392.7 4,679.2 2,698.6 697.9 689.0 86.5 422.5 362.6 171.1 1,408.0 638.9 1,761.7 2024 June
2,043.1 664.7 1,378.4 4,670.8 2,688.5 702.9 688.4 86.5 418.4 358.4 172.6 1,390.2 644.3 1,659.8 July
1,999.5 602.6 1,396.9 4,731.6 2,744.8 710.1 687.4 93.8 415.5 355.4 173.7 1,391.4 643.6 1,613.0 Aug.
2,015.6 667.8 1,347.7 4,746.9 2,754.9 721.1 680.6 88.1 413.7 352.8 176.6 1,403.9 644.6 1,674.4 Sep.
2,014.3 661.3 1,353.0 4,742.1 2,752.8 728.7 680.6 88.3 411.9 350.3 168.1 1,410.5 648.3 1,784.5 Oct.
2,043.9 673.3 1,370.5 4,802.9 2,814.1 725.1 692.3 87.3 409.4 348.4 161.9 1,410.3 649.9 1,856.8 Nov.
Commercial banks 6
1,074.1 504.9 569.1 1,965.8 1,209.7 382.6 248.0 87.0 84.7 51.3 40.8 227.7 229.3 1,401.8 2024 Oct.
1,088.2 511.8 576.3 1,991.9 1,234.7 379.4 259.6 86.4 84.0 50.7 34.1 227.5 230.6 1,474.2 Nov.
Big banks 7
411.1 189.1 222.0 896.9 552.1 192.7 71.2 43.5 77.2 44.6 3.7 170.7 87.5 733.2 2024 Oct.
422.0 185.2 236.8 899.0 557.2 190.9 70.6 39.8 76.5 44.0 3.7 170.8 88.5 761.1 Nov.
Regional banks and other commercial banks
460.5 227.5 233.0 840.7 507.4 135.7 153.3 43.6 7.3 6.5 36.9 54.8 122.8 649.2 2024 Oct.
448.4 221.4 226.9 861.6 525.4 135.2 163.4 46.6 7.3 6.5 30.3 54.5 122.8 692.9 Nov.
Branches of foreign banks
202.4 88.4 114.0 228.2 150.2 54.2 23.5 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.1 2.1 19.0 19.5 2024 Oct.
217.8 105.2 112.6 231.3 152.1 53.3 25.6 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.1 2.2 19.2 20.2 Nov.
Landesbanken
202.1 38.4 163.7 301.0 153.5 74.5 66.4 0.8 4.2 4.2 2.5 233.2 43.9 109.1 2024 Oct.
205.7 40.6 165.1 301.0 155.2 72.1 66.6 0.5 4.2 4.2 2.8 232.8 44.2 110.5 Nov.
Savings banks
143.6 3.1 140.5 1,183.4 769.3 100.6 21.6 – 194.4 175.9 97.5 23.5 150.8 60.7 2024 Oct.
144.9 2.8 142.1 1,202.9 789.7 100.5 22.1 – 192.9 174.8 97.8 23.3 150.8 61.1 Nov.
Credit cooperatives
153.7 1.6 152.1 878.9 540.7 138.0 45.1 – 128.3 118.5 26.7 8.9 111.9 41.5 2024 Oct.
154.1 1.3 152.8 886.3 549.1 137.2 45.3 – 128.0 118.4 26.7 8.9 112.0 40.8 Nov.
Mortgage banks
40.0 2.9 37.1 54.1 2.2 6.0 45.9 0.1 – – . 108.4 9.3 7.6 2024 Oct.
40.7 2.8 37.9 54.4 2.3 6.5 45.6 0.1 – – . 109.0 9.3 7.6 Nov.
Building and loan associations
38.7 2.4 36.3 193.7 6.9 2.9 183.3 – 0.4 0.4 0.1 7.6 13.2 8.3 2024 Oct.
38.5 2.8 35.7 193.5 6.9 2.9 183.2 – 0.4 0.4 0.1 7.5 13.2 8.5 Nov.
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
362.1 108.0 254.1 165.3 70.5 24.1 70.4 0.3 – – . 801.2 89.9 155.4 2024 Oct.
371.8 111.2 260.6 173.0 76.2 26.4 70.0 0.3 – – . 801.4 89.9 154.1 Nov.
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
630.4 317.6 312.7 806.8 506.4 168.9 106.7 50.4 6.7 6.4 18.1 51.5 106.7 769.5 2024 Oct.
632.6 325.6 306.9 824.0 524.1 163.4 114.8 51.3 6.6 6.3 15.0 51.6 106.9 830.5 Nov.
of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
428.0 229.3 198.7 578.6 356.1 114.8 83.2 50.4 6.5 6.2 18.0 49.4 87.7 750.0 2024 Oct.
414.8 220.5 194.3 592.7 372.0 110.1 89.2 51.3 6.4 6.1 14.9 49.4 87.7 810.4 Nov.
and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  3 Included in time deposits.  4 Excluding deposits
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2).  5 Including subordinated
negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
6 Commercial banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other
commercial banks” and ”Branches of foreign banks”.  7 Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner
Bank AG (up to Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische
Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG), Deutsche Postbank AG (from December 2004 up to April2018) and DB Privat- und Firmenkundenbank AG (from May 2018) (see the explanatory
notes in the Statistical Series Banking statistics, Table I.3, banking group “Big banks “).
8 Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in other categories
of banks and the category ”Branches (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”.
9 Separate presentation of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks included in
other banking categories.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
26•
IV. Banks
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
PeriodCash in
hand
(euro area
banknotes
and
coins)Credit
balances
with the
Bundes-
bank TotalCredit
balances
and loans BillsNegotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
banksSecurities
issued by
banksMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total Loans BillsTreasury
bills and
negotiable
money mar-
ket paper
issued by
non-banksSecurities
issued
by non-
banks  1
End of year or month *
2014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2017 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
2018 40.4 416.1 1,323.5 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 239.0 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.9
2019 43.2 476.6 1,254.7 1,016.2 0.0 0.7 237.9 4.5 3,521.5 3,119.2 0.3 3.3 398.7
2020 47.2 792.9 1,367.9 1,119.7 0.0 0.7 247.5 8.8 3,647.0 3,245.1 0.2 4.0 397.7
2021 49.4 905.0 1,409.6 1,163.7 – 0.5 245.3 10.3 3,798.1 3,392.4 0.3 2.6 402.8
2022 19.8 67.3 2,347.0 2,101.4 – 1.0 244.6 12.1 4,015.6 3,613.1 0.2 2.7 399.6
2023 18.5 52.0 2,280.7 2,029.3 – 0.8 250.6 24.2 4,044.1 3,649.9 0.1 0.9 393.3
2023 June 17.5 51.6 2,366.1 2,114.1 – 0.9 251.0 12.7 4,042.1 3,645.6 0.1 2.9 393.5
July 17.0 69.9 2,369.8 2,118.4 – 1.1 250.3 12.8 4,048.7 3,653.9 0.1 3.2 391.6
Aug. 17.3 46.7 2,392.0 2,139.7 – 1.2 251.1 12.9 4,046.7 3,649.9 0.1 2.5 394.2
Sep. 17.9 49.6 2,305.0 2,056.1 – 1.0 247.8 12.9 4,048.1 3,653.5 0.1 3.4 391.1
Oct. 17.4 62.2 2,351.7 2,102.8 – 0.8 248.0 13.1 4,051.9 3,656.6 0.1 3.0 392.2
Nov. 16.7 45.5 2,375.9 2,122.3 – 0.9 252.7 13.3 4,057.9 3,661.2 0.1 3.1 393.6
Dec. 18.5 52.0 2,280.7 2,029.3 – 0.8 250.6 24.2 4,044.1 3,649.9 0.1 0.9 393.3
2024 Jan. 16.1 73.1 2,330.7 2,070.9 – 0.8 259.0 28.1 4,048.3 3,649.5 0.0 1.4 397.4
Feb. 16.2 47.5 2,376.9 2,112.0 – 0.8 264.1 31.6 4,055.7 3,654.0 0.1 0.5 401.2
Mar. 17.5 46.9 2,325.4 2,058.2 – 0.7 266.5 34.3 4,061.0 3,658.4 0.1 0.5 402.1
Apr. 16.4 46.0 2,319.4 2,050.6 – 0.7 268.1 38.0 4,062.1 3,661.7 0.0 1.7 398.6
May 16.6 43.4 2,317.7 2,048.2 – 0.8 268.7 41.5 4,069.5 3,666.0 0.1 1.2 402.2
June 16.5 46.6 2,313.9 2,045.6 – 0.8 267.5 44.4 4,076.9 3,670.9 0.1 1.1 404.8
July 16.1 50.0 2,259.5 1,989.8 – 0.7 269.0 46.0 4,083.3 3,676.4 0.0 1.1 405.8
Aug. 16.8 46.0 2,263.7 1,992.9 – 0.8 269.9 47.3 4,088.6 3,677.6 0.1 1.4 409.5
Sep. 17.1 48.4 2,225.0 1,954.8 – 0.9 269.3 46.5 4,098.6 3,684.7 0.1 2.0 411.8
Oct. 17.9 50.5 2,215.2 1,943.4 – 0.9 270.9 44.8 4,099.7 3,689.4 0.0 3.1 407.2
Nov. 17.2 43.2 2,248.3 1,977.8 – 0.9 269.6 36.8 4,109.8 3,698.7 0.1 2.6 408.5
Changes *
2015 +0.3 + 73.7 – 80.7 – 4.3 –0.0 – 0.4 –75.9 –0.1 +68.9 +54.1 –0.0 – 0.3 +15.1
2016 +6.5 +129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 – – 0.9 –17.9 +0.4 +43.7 +62.8 –0.1 – 0.1 –18.9
2017 +6.1 +108.4 + 50.3 + 70.4 –0.0 + 0.0 –20.1 –0.1 +57.0 +70.2 +0.0 + 0.4 –13.6
2018 +8.5 + 24.0 – 81.0 – 76.6 +0.0 + 0.1 – 4.4 +3.8 +71.5 +105.4 –0.1 – 0.5 –33.2
2019 +2.8 + 59.7 – 63.0 – 61.1 –0.0 – 0.2 – 1.6 –1.4 +126.7 +129.1 +0.1 + 3.1 – 5.5
2020 +4.1 +316.4 +201.2 +191.6 –0.0 + 0.0 + 9.6 +4.3 +123.2 +123.6 –0.1 + 0.7 – 1.0
2021 +2.2 +111.8 + 44.1 + 46.3 –0.0 – 0.2 – 2.0 +1.5 +152.2 +147.8 +0.0 – 2.2 + 6.6
2022 –29.6 –836.6 +938.0 +938.1 – + 0.2 – 0.3 +1.7 +216.7 +220.1 –0.1 + 0.1 – 3.3
2023 –1.3 – 15.3 – 65.5 – 71.2 – – 0.2 + 5.9 +1.9 +30.9 +39.0 –0.1 – 1.8 – 6.2
2023 June –0.5 + 2.9 –116.9 –115.7 – + 0.1 – 1.3 +0.0 + 4.4 – 3.7 –0.0 + 0.7 + 7.4
July –0.5 + 18.4 + 3.7 + 4.3 – + 0.2 – 0.8 +0.1 + 6.6 + 8.3 –0.0 + 0.2 – 1.9
Aug. +0.3 – 23.2 + 22.2 + 21.3 – + 0.1 + 0.8 +0.1 – 1.9 – 4.0 +0.0 – 0.6 + 2.7
Sep. +0.6 + 2.8 – 87.0 – 83.6 – – 0.2 – 3.3 +0.1 + 1.3 + 3.7 +0.0 + 0.9 – 3.2
Oct. –0.5 + 12.7 + 46.8 + 46.8 – – 0.2 + 0.2 +0.2 + 3.7 + 3.0 –0.0 – 0.4 + 1.1
Nov. –0.6 – 16.7 + 24.2 + 19.5 – + 0.1 + 4.6 +0.1 + 6.1 + 4.7 +0.0 + 0.1 + 1.3
Dec. +1.8 + 6.5 – 95.5 – 93.3 – – 0.1 – 2.0 +0.6 –12.7 –10.3 –0.0 – 2.2 – 0.2
2024 Jan. –2.4 + 21.1 + 48.6 + 40.3 – – 0.0 + 8.4 +3.9 + 4.0 – 0.5 –0.0 + 0.5 + 4.0
Feb. +0.0 – 25.6 + 46.3 + 41.2 – – 0.0 + 5.1 +3.4 + 6.7 + 3.7 +0.0 – 0.9 + 3.8
Mar. +1.3 – 0.6 – 51.5 – 53.8 – – 0.1 + 2.3 +2.8 + 5.3 + 4.4 +0.0 – 0.1 + 0.9
Apr. –1.1 – 0.8 – 5.9 – 7.5 – + 0.0 + 1.6 +3.7 + 1.1 + 3.3 –0.0 + 1.3 – 3.5
May +0.2 – 2.7 – 1.7 – 2.4 – + 0.1 + 0.6 +3.5 + 7.4 + 4.3 +0.0 – 0.5 + 3.6
June –0.0 + 3.2 – 3.8 – 1.9 – – 0.0 – 1.9 +2.9 + 7.4 + 4.9 –0.0 – 0.1 + 2.6
July –0.4 + 3.4 – 53.0 – 54.4 – – 0.1 + 1.5 +1.6 + 7.1 + 6.1 –0.0 – 0.1 + 1.0
Aug. +0.6 – 3.8 + 4.7 + 3.6 – + 0.2 + 0.9 +1.4 + 5.3 + 1.3 +0.0 + 0.4 + 3.7
Sep. +0.4 + 2.4 – 38.7 – 38.1 – + 0.1 – 0.7 +1.3 +10.8 + 7.9 –0.0 + 0.6 + 2.3
Oct. +0.7 + 2.1 – 4.0 – 5.6 – – 0.0 + 1.6 –1.7 + 1.2 + 4.7 –0.0 + 1.1 – 4.6
Nov. –0.7 – 7.2 + 33.2 + 34.5 – + 0.0 – 1.3 –8.0 +10.1 + 9.4 +0.0 – 0.5 + 1.3
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange ofequalisation claims (see also footnote 2).  2 Including debt securities arising from the
exchange of equalisation claims.  3 Including liabilities arising from registered debt
securities, registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities;

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
27•
IV. Banks
Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Equalisa-
tion
claims  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loansPartici-
pating
interests
in
domestic
banks
and
enterprises TotalSight
deposits
4Time
deposits
4Redis-
counted
bills  5Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
de-
positsTime
deposits
6Savings
de-
posits  7Bank
savings
bonds  8Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
– 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
– 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
– 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016
– 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 2017
– 18.0 90.9 1,020.9 105.5 915.4 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9 2018
– 17.3 90.4 1,010.2 107.2 902.9 0.0 4.4 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 575.2 33.2 32.5 2019
– 23.5 78.3 1,236.7 125.0 1,111.6 0.0 13.1 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 560.6 28.3 34.4 2020
– 25.7 79.2 1,338.4 117.2 1,221.3 0.0 16.4 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 561.2 24.5 34.2 2021
– 25.6 80.3 1,231.6 136.9 1,094.7 0.0 15.7 4,162.0 2,720.6 873.5 533.2 34.6 35.9 2022
– 23.8 80.3 1,099.9 137.9 962.0 0.0 13.5 4,229.0 2,540.8 1,100.1 445.9 142.2 50.1 2023
– 24.4 81.2 1,149.6 134.0 1,015.6 0.0 14.6 4,176.3 2,600.9 1,020.0 483.3 72.1 36.5 2023 June
– 24.4 81.0 1,159.8 134.8 1,025.0 0.0 14.6 4,180.2 2,582.2 1,042.9 475.9 79.1 36.7 July
– 24.4 80.3 1,162.1 138.5 1,023.7 0.0 14.5 4,188.4 2,568.4 1,061.7 467.5 90.7 36.9 Aug.
– 24.2 80.4 1,112.7 137.4 975.3 0.0 14.1 4,189.3 2,558.0 1,072.5 461.8 97.0 37.1 Sep.
– 24.1 80.3 1,132.1 136.7 995.4 0.0 14.0 4,198.0 2,544.5 1,086.5 455.4 111.6 37.3 Oct.
– 24.0 80.6 1,136.6 140.0 996.7 0.0 14.0 4,217.3 2,552.9 1,085.6 448.3 130.5 37.6 Nov.
– 23.8 80.3 1,099.9 137.9 962.0 0.0 13.5 4,229.0 2,540.8 1,100.1 445.9 142.2 50.1 Dec.
– 23.7 80.3 1,125.8 155.3 970.5 0.0 13.4 4,216.3 2,496.8 1,128.7 439.4 151.4 54.5 2024 Jan.
– 23.7 80.1 1,134.8 161.4 973.4 0.0 13.3 4,213.6 2,478.3 1,143.5 434.4 157.3 57.5 Feb.
– 23.5 80.3 1,083.4 159.4 924.0 0.0 12.8 4,239.0 2,479.2 1,168.8 430.3 160.7 60.2 Mar.
– 23.4 80.8 1,094.3 160.6 933.8 0.0 12.7 4,239.6 2,475.4 1,173.6 425.8 164.8 63.7 Apr.
– 23.5 81.0 1,088.4 158.0 930.5 0.0 12.7 4,263.3 2,497.0 1,176.9 422.2 167.2 66.9 May
– 23.2 81.1 1,067.5 158.5 909.0 0.0 12.3 4,264.7 2,494.2 1,182.5 418.1 170.0 68.9 June
– 23.1 84.5 1,055.3 159.3 896.1 0.0 12.1 4,267.8 2,497.1 1,185.2 414.0 171.5 70.0 July
– 26.4 84.9 1,025.0 133.1 891.9 0.0 12.0 4,323.3 2,548.5 1,191.1 411.2 172.5 74.5 Aug.
– 26.1 84.6 1,004.3 135.4 868.8 0.0 11.6 4,322.6 2,544.1 1,193.8 409.3 175.4 75.3 Sep.
– 26.1 84.0 1,001.9 132.9 868.9 0.0 11.6 4,329.5 2,555.1 1,200.0 407.6 166.9 73.9 Oct.
– 26.2 84.3 1,016.5 139.5 877.0 0.0 11.5 4,371.9 2,608.4 1,197.6 405.1 160.8 66.5 Nov.
Changes *
– –2.1 –4.3 –46.6 + 3.3 –50.0 +0.0 –1.3 +106.5 +156.2 –28.3 –11.3 –10.1 –1.6 2015
– –1.3 +1.5 – 1.7 + 0.3 – 2.0 +0.0 –0.5 +104.7 +124.5 – 6.9 – 7.9 –5.0 –0.5 2016
– –0.0 –1.6 +11.0 –18.4 +29.4 –0.0 –0.5 +103.1 +142.8 –27.5 – 5.6 –6.7 +0.4 2017
– –1.0 +3.1 –25.0 – 3.1 –21.9 +0.0 –0.4 +117.7 +139.3 –10.8 – 4.3 –6.5 +3.9 2018
– –0.7 +0.1 – 8.6 + 1.6 –10.2 +0.0 –0.3 +122.5 +155.8 –25.7 – 3.4 –4.1 –1.4 2019
– +5.7 –3.3 +313.4 +23.2 +290.2 –0.0 +8.2 +221.6 +273.7 –32.7 –14.5 –4.9 +1.9 2020
– +2.3 +1.0 +105.2 – 7.4 +112.6 +0.0 +3.3 +95.3 +144.3 –46.2 + 0.7 –3.5 –0.2 2021
– –0.1 +1.7 –104.6 + 8.8 –113.4 –0.0 –0.6 +191.8 +65.8 +143.4 –27.5 +10.1 +1.7 2022
– –1.2 +0.6 –139.9 – 8.9 –131.0 ±0.0 –2.3 +76.6 –172.0 +226.4 –82.3 +104.5 +3.5 2023
– –0.4 +0.1 –79.7 – 3.7 –76.0 +0.0 –0.5 + 2.3 –23.0 +26.0 – 7.3 +6.7 –0.1 2023 June
– +0.0 –0.1 +10.2 + 0.8 + 9.4 – –0.0 + 3.8 –18.7 +22.8 – 7.3 +7.0 +0.2 July
– +0.1 –0.8 + 3.1 + 3.9 – 0.8 +0.0 –0.1 + 8.2 –13.2 +21.3 – 8.5 +8.5 +0.2 Aug.
– –0.2 +0.1 –49.4 – 1.1 –48.3 –0.0 –0.4 + 0.9 –10.5 +10.7 – 5.7 +6.3 +0.2 Sep.
– –0.1 –0.1 +19.9 – 0.7 +20.6 –0.0 –0.1 + 8.7 –13.4 +14.0 – 6.4 +14.6 +0.3 Oct.
– –0.1 +0.3 + 4.6 + 3.3 + 1.3 +0.0 –0.0 +19.3 + 8.5 – 1.0 – 7.1 +18.8 +0.3 Nov.
– –0.2 –0.2 –47.3 –12.5 –34.8 –0.0 –0.5 +22.3 – 0.7 +13.7 – 2.5 +11.8 +1.2 Dec.
– –0.1 –0.1 +26.0 +17.4 + 8.6 +0.0 –0.1 –12.7 –44.1 +28.7 – 6.5 +9.2 +4.4 2024 Jan.
– –0.0 –0.2 + 8.9 + 6.1 + 2.9 –0.0 –0.1 – 2.8 –18.4 +14.8 – 5.0 +5.9 +3.0 Feb.
– –0.2 +0.3 –51.4 – 1.9 –49.5 – –0.5 +25.5 + 0.9 +25.3 – 4.1 +3.4 +2.6 Mar.
– –0.1 +0.4 +11.0 + 1.2 + 9.8 – –0.1 + 0.6 – 3.8 + 4.8 – 4.6 +4.2 +3.5 Apr.
– +0.0 +0.2 – 5.3 – 2.6 – 2.7 – –0.1 +23.7 +21.7 + 3.1 – 3.5 +2.4 +3.2 May
– –0.2 +0.1 –18.9 + 0.5 –19.4 – –0.4 – 0.4 – 2.7 + 3.7 – 4.2 +2.8 +2.0 June
– –0.1 +3.4 – 8.1 + 4.8 –13.0 +0.0 –0.2 + 3.1 + 2.9 + 2.8 – 4.0 +1.5 +1.1 July
– +3.2 +0.4 + 1.7 + 5.9 – 4.1 +0.0 –0.1 +23.5 +19.5 + 5.8 – 2.9 +1.0 +4.5 Aug.
– –0.3 +0.0 –20.7 + 2.4 –23.1 +0.0 –0.4 – 0.7 – 4.5 + 2.7 – 1.8 +2.9 +0.9 Sep.
– –0.0 –0.6 – 2.4 – 2.5 + 0.1 –0.0 –0.1 + 7.1 +11.6 – 1.8 – 1.7 –1.0 –1.5 Oct.
– +0.1 +0.3 +14.7 + 6.6 + 8.1 –0.0 –0.0 +42.7 +52.8 – 1.6 – 2.5 –6.1 –7.4 Nov.
including subordinated liabilities.  4 Including liabilities arising from monetary policy
operations with the Bundesbank.  5 Own acceptances and promissory notes
outstanding.  6 Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999,including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  7 Excluding
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8).  8 Including liabilities
arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
28•
IV. Banks
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Credit balances and loans, bills Loans and bills
PeriodCash in
hand
(non-
euro area
banknotes
and
coins) Total TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termNegotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
banksSecurities
issued by
banksMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termTreasury
bills and
negotiable
money
market
paper
issued by
non-banksSecurities
issued by
non-banks
End of year or month *
2014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2017 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
2018 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.1
2019 0.2 1,064.2 814.0 532.7 281.3 1.8 248.5 3.7 795.3 513.1 111.0 402.1 7.7 274.5
2020 0.2 1,024.3 784.8 532.1 252.8 2.6 236.8 4.0 822.8 523.0 125.4 397.5 11.3 288.5
2021 0.3 1,100.7 877.5 614.7 262.7 0.4 222.8 3.5 871.2 572.2 151.5 420.7 8.0 290.9
2022 0.2 1,151.3 926.6 656.2 270.4 1.7 223.0 3.7 913.7 616.2 173.0 443.2 14.9 282.6
2023 0.2 1,166.9 934.7 652.0 282.7 3.1 229.2 6.1 960.4 627.3 174.9 452.4 12.3 320.8
2023 June 0.2 1,177.3 939.1 681.7 257.4 3.6 234.6 4.3 961.8 628.4 181.4 447.0 15.8 317.6
July 0.2 1,194.1 955.3 694.8 260.5 4.1 234.7 4.3 962.7 637.4 190.4 447.0 16.4 308.9
Aug. 0.2 1,197.1 959.5 693.8 265.7 3.7 233.9 4.3 954.8 630.9 181.3 449.6 16.2 307.8
Sep. 0.2 1,203.3 966.5 687.9 278.6 3.5 233.3 4.2 958.8 633.0 183.8 449.2 16.1 309.7
Oct. 0.2 1,212.3 975.9 689.7 286.2 3.6 232.8 4.2 956.8 635.7 188.7 447.0 14.6 306.5
Nov. 0.2 1,190.3 954.5 674.0 280.5 3.3 232.4 4.2 971.3 645.4 194.5 450.9 15.3 310.6
Dec. 0.2 1,166.9 934.7 652.0 282.7 3.1 229.2 6.1 960.4 627.3 174.9 452.4 12.3 320.8
2024 Jan. 0.2 1,206.8 971.9 684.9 287.0 2.8 232.0 6.1 985.5 649.3 196.9 452.4 14.6 321.6
Feb. 0.2 1,245.8 1,010.7 724.3 286.4 3.0 232.2 6.9 1,000.4 660.7 204.4 456.3 14.2 325.4
Mar. 0.2 1,255.0 1,016.4 732.9 283.5 2.7 236.0 7.0 1,007.9 651.5 191.9 459.6 15.3 341.2
Apr. 0.2 1,255.8 1,018.0 729.5 288.5 2.2 235.6 7.4 1,016.3 664.8 206.3 458.5 16.5 335.0
May 0.2 1,282.2 1,041.2 755.0 286.2 2.5 238.5 7.5 1,018.6 667.3 207.9 459.4 16.1 335.2
June 0.2 1,253.4 1,012.8 723.8 289.0 2.3 238.3 7.2 1,025.1 665.2 207.3 457.9 16.5 343.4
July 0.2 1,251.7 1,007.8 719.6 288.2 2.6 241.3 7.0 1,025.1 669.1 208.7 460.4 15.8 340.2
Aug. 0.2 1,256.1 1,010.7 720.2 290.5 2.6 242.8 6.9 1,027.7 673.1 211.4 461.7 16.0 338.6
Sep. 0.2 1,291.1 1,042.8 755.5 287.3 2.4 245.9 8.9 1,062.7 693.5 230.3 463.2 16.7 352.6
Oct. 0.2 1,293.3 1,043.2 755.3 287.9 2.4 247.7 8.9 1,064.1 695.1 229.2 465.9 15.4 353.6
Nov. 0.2 1,321.2 1,071.1 781.1 290.0 2.2 247.9 8.1 1,074.5 699.2 230.9 468.2 13.3 362.0
Changes *
2015 +0.1 –91.8 –86.0 –82.2 –3.8 –6.7 +0.8 –0.1 –6.1 –9.2 –6.5 –2.7 + 1.1 +2.0
2016 +0.0 –25.5 –14.5 –38.2 +23.7 –0.7 –10.3 –0.0 +17.4 +28.9 +10.1 +18.8 – 3.0 –8.5
2017 +0.0 –57.2 –48.7 –61.5 +12.8 +0.0 –8.5 +0.6 –4.7 +13.0 +8.6 +4.4 + 0.7 –18.4
2018 +0.0 +49.6 +34.0 +57.7 –23.7 +0.2 +15.3 +0.7 +18.3 +28.3 +3.2 +25.2 – 0.4 –9.7
2019 –0.0 –4.1 –11.3 –21.9 +10.7 +0.8 +6.3 +0.7 +26.8 +19.9 +12.7 +7.3 + 3.0 +3.8
2020 –0.0 –32.0 –22.4 –6.6 –15.8 +0.9 –10.5 +0.3 +34.4 +14.7 +9.0 +5.7 + 3.6 +16.1
2021 +0.0 +52.8 +71.1 +68.9 +2.2 –2.5 –15.8 –0.5 +37.8 +39.7 +29.8 +9.9 – 3.2 +1.4
2022 –0.1 +21.7 +20.4 +17.9 +2.6 +1.3 –0.0 +0.2 +37.0 +37.0 +16.8 +20.2 + 6.7 –6.7
2023 –0.0 +32.6 +24.9 +10.2 +14.7 +1.4 +6.3 +0.5 +51.5 +14.8 +5.2 +9.6 – 2.6 +39.3
2023 June +0.0 –17.7 –17.6 –9.9 –7.6 +0.2 –0.3 +0.1 –1.9 –8.7 –11.1 +2.4 + 1.2 +5.6
July –0.0 +18.4 +17.7 +13.9 +3.9 +0.5 +0.2 +0.0 +3.0 +10.5 +9.6 +0.9 + 0.7 –8.2
Aug. –0.0 +0.0 +1.3 –2.2 +3.5 –0.4 –0.9 –0.0 –10.2 –8.3 –9.8 +1.5 – 0.3 –1.6
Sep. +0.0 –1.0 –0.0 –10.1 +10.1 –0.2 –0.7 –0.0 –0.1 –1.2 +1.3 –2.5 – 0.1 +1.1
Oct. +0.0 +10.3 +10.6 +2.6 +8.0 +0.1 –0.4 –0.1 –0.7 +3.8 +5.2 –1.4 – 1.6 –3.0
Nov. – –14.4 –13.9 –11.5 –2.4 –0.2 –0.3 +0.0 +18.7 +12.9 +7.6 +5.3 + 0.8 +5.0
Dec. –0.0 –21.0 –17.6 –21.0 +3.4 –0.3 –3.2 +0.0 –9.7 –17.2 –19.2 +2.0 – 3.0 +10.5
2024 Jan. +0.0 +34.0 +31.6 +29.7 +1.9 –0.2 +2.7 –0.0 +21.4 +19.0 +21.0 –2.0 + 2.2 +0.1
Feb. –0.0 +39.2 +38.9 +39.6 –0.7 +0.1 +0.2 +0.9 +15.8 +12.3 +7.5 +4.8 – 0.3 +3.8
Mar. –0.0 +9.1 +5.6 +8.7 –3.0 –0.3 +3.8 +0.1 +7.7 –9.1 –12.5 +3.4 + 1.0 +15.7
Apr. +0.0 –1.5 –0.8 –4.7 +4.0 –0.4 –0.3 +0.4 +7.1 +12.3 +14.0 –1.6 + 1.2 –6.4
May –0.0 +30.1 +26.8 +27.6 –0.9 +0.3 +3.0 +0.0 +4.4 +4.1 +2.3 +1.8 – 0.4 +0.7
June +0.0 –33.6 –33.1 –34.1 +1.0 –0.2 –0.3 –0.2 +3.4 –4.7 –1.6 –3.1 + 0.4 +7.7
July –0.0 +2.5 –0.8 –1.3 +0.5 +0.3 +3.0 –0.2 +2.3 +5.8 +2.4 +3.4 – 0.7 –2.9
Aug. +0.0 +11.1 +9.5 +4.7 +4.8 –0.0 +1.6 –0.1 +7.8 +8.2 +4.6 +3.6 + 0.3 –0.7
Sep. –0.0 +37.6 +34.7 +36.9 –2.2 –0.2 +3.1 –0.1 +35.7 +20.8 +19.2 +1.6 + 0.7 +14.2
Oct. +0.0 –5.7 –7.3 –4.8 –2.5 +0.0 +1.6 –0.0 –3.4 –2.2 –2.9 +0.6 – 1.4 +0.2
Nov. +0.0 +18.1 +18.3 +19.7 –1.5 –0.2 +0.0 –0.8 +3.9 –1.2 –0.5 –0.7 – 2.1 +7.2
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequentrevisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
29•
IV. Banks
Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Time deposits (including bank
savings bonds)Time deposits (including
savings deposits and bank
savings bonds)
Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loansPartici-
pating
interests
in foreign
banks
and
enter-
prises TotalSight
deposits TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
deposits TotalShort-
termMedium
and
long-
termMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
14.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 2016
12.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 2017
11.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1 2018
11.5 21.3 680.6 339.3 341.2 243.2 98.0 – 229.8 112.3 117.4 60.5 57.0 0.1 2019
11.3 17.2 761.2 428.8 332.5 205.1 127.3 – 258.5 133.3 125.2 65.6 59.7 0.1 2020
11.1 16.6 914.6 456.0 458.6 301.5 157.2 0.0 288.2 141.9 146.2 68.7 77.6 0.1 2021
10.4 15.7 998.4 480.0 518.4 376.4 141.9 – 370.3 196.0 174.3 84.4 89.8 0.1 2022
10.7 16.7 923.8 469.5 454.3 288.1 166.2 – 380.6 176.2 204.4 104.9 99.5 1.1 2023
10.2 16.0 1,025.8 565.0 460.8 302.6 158.2 0.0 411.5 205.6 205.9 107.3 98.6 0.4 2023 June
10.2 16.1 1,052.4 582.3 470.1 311.1 159.0 0.0 411.0 204.0 207.0 107.9 99.1 0.3 July
10.2 16.1 1,021.8 566.5 455.3 294.3 161.1 – 407.7 198.5 209.2 112.0 97.2 0.3 Aug.
10.2 16.1 1,006.0 536.9 469.1 293.9 175.2 – 403.9 206.3 197.6 100.2 97.4 0.4 Sep.
10.2 16.6 1,021.8 558.9 462.9 288.0 174.9 – 423.2 207.0 216.2 117.4 98.8 0.3 Oct.
10.4 16.4 1,003.7 538.0 465.7 291.0 174.6 – 412.5 206.3 206.3 107.1 99.2 0.3 Nov.
10.7 16.7 923.8 469.5 454.3 288.1 166.2 – 380.6 176.2 204.4 104.9 99.5 1.1 Dec.
10.7 16.4 979.5 520.1 459.5 284.6 174.9 – 409.6 200.3 209.3 110.6 98.6 0.7 2024 Jan.
10.7 15.9 1,025.8 534.6 491.2 311.3 179.9 0.0 425.9 211.9 214.1 117.4 96.6 2.0 Feb.
10.7 15.9 1,041.0 502.1 538.9 370.9 168.1 0.0 408.7 192.8 215.9 118.1 97.7 2.6 Mar.
10.8 16.1 1,029.6 524.9 504.8 329.8 175.0 0.0 419.4 207.2 212.3 114.6 97.7 3.2 Apr.
10.8 16.0 1,034.0 554.2 479.7 315.8 163.9 0.0 420.7 212.0 208.7 109.3 99.4 4.0 May
10.6 16.0 1,033.2 549.6 483.6 315.3 168.3 0.0 414.4 204.4 210.1 111.0 99.0 4.5 June
10.5 16.0 987.8 505.4 482.4 311.4 170.9 0.0 402.9 191.4 211.5 112.3 99.3 4.8 July
10.6 16.0 974.5 469.5 505.0 330.4 174.6 0.0 408.3 196.3 212.0 112.7 99.3 5.1 Aug.
10.6 15.9 1,011.3 532.4 478.9 299.4 179.5 0.0 424.3 210.9 213.5 113.7 99.8 5.5 Sep.
10.7 16.2 1,012.4 528.4 484.0 303.5 180.6 0.0 412.5 197.7 214.9 116.2 98.7 5.4 Oct.
10.8 16.3 1,027.3 533.8 493.5 314.3 179.2 0.0 431.1 205.7 225.3 118.4 106.9 4.1 Nov.
Changes *
– 0.6 – 6.1 –15.4 +40.6 –56.0 –48.6 – 7.4 –0.0 –26.5 –13.9 –12.6 +0.3 –13.0 –0.0 2015
– 0.1 – 1.5 +82.7 +51.0 +31.7 +27.0 + 4.7 –0.0 +3.5 –3.1 +6.7 +5.9 +0.8 –0.0 2016
– 1.0 – 4.1 –15.5 +25.2 –40.8 –43.2 + 2.4 ±0.0 +31.8 +11.0 +20.8 +15.6 +5.2 –0.4 2017
– 0.2 – 2.2 –23.9 –23.4 – 0.4 + 2.1 – 2.6 –0.0 –11.9 –0.2 –11.8 –5.7 –6.0 –0.2 2018
– 0.3 – 0.9 – 9.5 –49.4 +39.8 +28.0 +11.8 –0.0 –0.8 +2.1 –2.9 –1.8 –1.1 –0.0 2019
– 0.2 – 3.9 +83.8 +87.8 – 4.1 –34.7 +30.6 – +23.6 +13.8 +9.8 +7.1 +2.8 +0.0 2020
– 0.2 – 0.8 +136.6 +19.8 +116.8 +89.2 +27.6 +0.0 +22.7 +6.4 +16.3 +0.0 +16.3 –0.0 2021
– 0.7 – 1.0 +85.8 +29.1 +56.7 +69.6 –13.0 –0.0 +68.2 +49.0 +19.2 +13.9 +5.3 +0.0 2022
+ 0.2 + 1.1 –66.1 –4.6 –61.4 –86.9 +25.4 ±0.0 +11.6 –18.3 +29.9 +20.9 +9.0 +0.1 2023
– 0.2 – 0.0 –26.4 –26.1 – 0.3 + 3.9 – 4.2 – –23.1 –13.1 –9.9 –8.7 –1.2 +0.1 2023 June
– 0.0 + 0.1 +27.3 +17.2 +10.1 + 9.0 + 1.1 – +0.4 –1.3 +1.7 +1.1 +0.6 –0.0 July
+ 0.0 – 0.0 –32.6 –16.4 –16.2 –17.9 + 1.7 –0.0 –4.3 –5.9 +1.6 +3.6 –2.0 –0.0 Aug.
– 0.0 – 0.0 –21.0 –32.3 +11.4 – 2.2 +13.5 – –5.7 +7.1 –12.8 –12.8 +0.0 +0.0 Sep.
+ 0.0 + 0.5 +17.0 +22.8 – 5.8 – 5.6 – 0.2 – +19.6 +0.9 +18.7 +17.3 +1.4 –0.1 Oct.
+ 0.2 – 0.1 –12.9 –18.4 + 5.5 + 4.9 + 0.6 – –8.6 +0.6 –9.2 –9.8 +0.6 –0.0 Nov.
+ 0.3 + 0.3 –77.4 –67.0 –10.4 – 2.3 – 8.2 – –31.3 –29.7 –1.5 –1.8 +0.3 –0.0 Dec.
+ 0.0 – 0.4 +51.4 +48.7 + 2.8 – 5.2 + 8.0 – +27.8 +23.6 +4.3 +5.3 –1.0 –0.4 2024 Jan.
+ 0.0 – 0.4 +46.4 +14.5 +31.9 +26.7 + 5.2 +0.0 +16.4 +11.5 +4.9 +6.8 –1.9 +1.4 Feb.
+ 0.0 – 0.0 +15.1 –32.4 +47.6 +59.5 –11.9 – –17.3 –19.1 +1.8 +0.7 +1.1 +0.5 Mar.
+ 0.0 + 0.1 –13.1 +22.2 –35.3 –41.9 + 6.6 – +10.1 +14.1 –4.0 –4.3 +0.3 +0.7 Apr.
– 0.0 – 0.0 + 7.1 +30.5 –23.5 –12.9 –10.6 – +2.3 +5.3 –3.0 –4.8 +1.8 +0.8 May
– 0.2 + 0.0 – 4.6 –6.3 + 1.8 – 1.9 + 3.6 – –7.5 –8.2 +0.7 +1.2 –0.5 +0.5 June
– 0.1 – 0.0 –40.6 –40.6 + 0.0 – 2.9 + 3.0 – –10.7 –12.6 +1.9 +1.6 +0.3 +0.3 July
+ 0.1 – 0.0 – 6.8 –33.2 +26.3 +20.8 + 5.5 – +7.6 +6.2 +1.4 +1.3 +0.2 +0.2 Aug.
+ 0.0 – 0.1 +38.6 +63.6 –24.9 –30.1 + 5.1 – +16.7 +14.8 +1.9 +1.3 +0.5 +0.4 Sep.
+ 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.8 –6.7 + 7.5 + 1.5 + 6.0 – –14.1 –14.1 –0.0 +1.2 –1.3 –0.1 Oct.
+ 0.1 – 0.0 + 6.8 +1.2 + 5.6 + 8.2 – 2.6 – +15.5 +6.8 +8.8 +1.0 +7.8 –1.2 Nov.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
30•
IV. Banks
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Short-term lending Medium- and long-term Lending to domestic
non-banks, total
to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
Periodincluding
negotiable
money market
paper, securities,
equalisation
claimsexcluding
negotiable
money market
paper, securities,
equalisation
claims Total TotalLoans
and
billsNegotiable
money
market
paper Total LoansTreasury
bills Total Total
End of year or month *
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2017 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
2018 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 – 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.8
2019 3,521.5 3,119.5 260.4 238.8 238.4 0.4 21.6 18.7 2.9 3,261.1 2,866.9
2020 3,647.0 3,245.3 243.3 221.6 221.2 0.4 21.6 18.0 3.6 3,403.8 3,013.0
2021 3,798.1 3,392.7 249.7 232.2 231.9 0.3 17.5 15.2 2.3 3,548.4 3,174.6
2022 4,015.6 3,613.3 296.4 279.8 279.4 0.4 16.7 14.3 2.3 3,719.2 3,359.9
2023 4,044.1 3,649.9 279.0 264.2 264.0 0.3 14.8 14.2 0.6 3,765.1 3,401.1
2023 June 4,042.1 3,645.7 300.3 280.5 279.6 0.9 19.8 17.8 2.0 3,741.8 3,388.7
July 4,048.7 3,653.9 299.4 277.4 276.6 0.9 21.9 19.6 2.3 3,749.3 3,395.5
Aug. 4,046.7 3,650.0 289.5 270.8 270.1 0.7 18.6 16.8 1.8 3,757.2 3,398.6
Sep. 4,048.1 3,653.6 297.2 275.5 274.8 0.6 21.7 19.0 2.7 3,751.0 3,395.8
Oct. 4,051.9 3,656.7 293.6 270.9 270.3 0.6 22.7 20.3 2.4 3,758.3 3,401.0
Nov. 4,057.9 3,661.3 291.1 272.0 271.4 0.7 19.0 16.6 2.4 3,766.9 3,404.2
Dec. 4,044.1 3,649.9 279.0 264.2 264.0 0.3 14.8 14.2 0.6 3,765.1 3,401.1
2024 Jan. 4,048.3 3,649.5 281.0 263.3 262.7 0.6 17.7 16.8 0.8 3,767.3 3,401.5
Feb. 4,055.7 3,654.0 281.5 267.3 266.8 0.5 14.2 14.1 0.0 3,774.3 3,404.7
Mar. 4,061.0 3,658.5 289.2 273.3 272.6 0.7 15.9 16.1 – 0.2 3,771.8 3,403.2
Apr. 4,062.1 3,661.8 289.3 270.4 269.6 0.8 18.9 18.0 0.9 3,772.8 3,406.5
May 4,069.5 3,666.1 288.4 271.4 270.5 0.9 17.0 16.7 0.3 3,781.1 3,410.7
June 4,076.9 3,670.9 294.3 273.8 273.0 0.7 20.5 20.1 0.4 3,782.6 3,408.6
July 4,083.3 3,676.5 290.5 270.8 270.1 0.7 19.7 19.3 0.4 3,792.8 3,416.3
Aug. 4,088.6 3,677.7 285.0 266.9 266.1 0.7 18.1 17.4 0.7 3,803.6 3,422.4
Sep. 4,098.6 3,684.8 295.2 275.2 274.3 0.9 20.0 18.9 1.1 3,803.4 3,419.6
Oct. 4,099.7 3,689.4 293.6 271.1 270.3 0.8 22.5 20.2 2.3 3,806.1 3,422.8
Nov. 4,109.8 3,698.8 291.5 270.4 269.7 0.7 21.1 19.2 1.9 3,818.3 3,432.0
Changes *
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 – 1.3 – 0.9 – 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 – 5.2 – 0.3 – 0.4 + 0.1 – 4.9 – 4.8 – 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.8
2017 + 57.0 + 70.2 – 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 – 12.1 – 12.4 + 0.3 + 63.5 + 103.4
2018 + 71.5 + 105.3 + 6.6 + 15.8 + 15.7 + 0.1 – 9.2 – 8.6 – 0.6 + 65.0 + 102.0
2019 + 126.7 + 129.1 + 11.7 + 11.6 + 11.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 3.0 + 3.1 + 115.0 + 132.8
2020 + 123.2 + 123.6 – 19.6 – 19.8 – 19.8 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.7 + 142.8 + 145.6
2021 + 152.2 + 147.8 + 8.8 + 13.8 + 13.8 – 0.1 – 4.9 – 2.8 – 2.1 + 143.4 + 157.9
2022 + 216.7 + 220.0 + 47.6 + 48.5 + 48.5 + 0.0 – 0.9 – 0.9 + 0.0 + 169.1 + 184.8
2023 + 30.9 + 38.9 – 15.3 – 14.5 – 14.4 – 0.1 – 0.8 + 0.9 – 1.7 + 46.2 + 42.3
2023 June + 4.4 – 3.7 + 1.7 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 2.7 + 0.9
July + 6.6 + 8.3 – 1.0 – 3.1 – 3.1 – 0.0 + 2.1 + 1.9 + 0.2 + 7.5 + 6.9
Aug. – 1.9 – 4.0 – 9.9 – 6.6 – 6.5 – 0.2 – 3.3 – 2.8 – 0.5 + 8.0 + 3.1
Sep. + 1.3 + 3.7 + 7.7 + 4.6 + 4.7 – 0.1 + 3.1 + 2.1 + 0.9 – 6.4 – 2.9
Oct. + 3.7 + 3.0 – 3.5 – 4.6 – 4.5 – 0.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 – 0.3 + 7.2 + 5.2
Nov. + 6.1 + 4.7 – 2.3 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.1 – 3.7 – 3.7 + 0.0 + 8.4 + 3.8
Dec. – 12.7 – 10.3 – 11.0 – 7.8 – 7.4 – 0.4 – 3.2 – 1.3 – 1.8 – 1.7 – 2.9
2024 Jan. + 4.0 – 0.5 + 1.9 – 0.9 – 1.2 + 0.3 + 2.8 + 2.6 + 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.3
Feb. + 6.7 + 3.7 + 0.4 + 3.9 + 4.0 – 0.1 – 3.5 – 2.7 – 0.8 + 6.3 + 2.7
Mar. + 5.3 + 4.4 + 6.6 + 4.8 + 4.7 + 0.2 + 1.7 + 2.0 – 0.2 – 1.3 – 0.3
Apr. + 1.1 + 3.3 + 0.1 – 2.8 – 3.0 + 0.2 + 3.0 + 1.9 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 3.4
May + 7.4 + 4.3 – 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.0 – 1.9 – 1.3 – 0.6 + 8.3 + 4.3
June + 7.4 + 4.9 + 5.9 + 2.4 + 2.5 – 0.1 + 3.5 + 3.4 + 0.1 + 1.6 – 2.1
July + 7.1 + 6.1 – 3.4 – 2.5 – 2.5 – 0.0 – 0.8 – 0.8 – 0.0 + 10.4 + 7.6
Aug. + 5.3 + 1.3 – 5.5 – 4.0 – 4.0 + 0.0 – 1.5 – 1.9 + 0.3 + 10.8 + 6.2
Sep. + 10.8 + 7.9 + 10.5 + 8.6 + 8.4 + 0.2 + 1.9 + 1.4 + 0.4 + 0.3 – 2.3
Oct. + 1.2 + 4.7 – 3.8 – 6.3 – 6.1 – 0.1 + 2.5 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 5.0 + 8.2
Nov. + 10.1 + 9.4 – 2.2 – 0.9 – 0.8 – 0.1 – 1.4 – 1.0 – 0.4 + 12.4 + 10.2
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims (see also
footnote 2).  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation
claims.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
31•
IV. Banks
lending
prises and households to general government
Loans Loans
TotalMedium-
termLong-
term SecuritiesMemo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Total TotalMedium-
termLong-
termSecur-
ities  1Equal-
isation
claims  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
2,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 – 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 – 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 – 1.8 2016
2,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 – 1.7 2017
2,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 – 1.4 2018
2,626.4 301.3 2,325.1 240.5 15.7 394.2 235.9 17.2 218.8 158.2 – 1.5 2019
2,771.8 310.5 2,461.4 241.1 22.4 390.8 234.3 15.7 218.6 156.6 – 1.1 2020
2,915.7 314.5 2,601.2 258.9 24.7 373.8 229.9 14.3 215.6 143.9 – 1.0 2021
3,085.9 348.7 2,737.1 274.0 24.6 359.3 233.7 14.1 219.6 125.6 – 1.0 2022
3,131.7 361.0 2,770.7 269.4 22.8 364.0 240.0 14.1 225.9 124.0 – 1.0 2023
3,117.4 360.0 2,757.5 271.3 23.3 353.1 230.9 13.4 217.6 122.2 – 1.0 2023 June
3,125.3 362.1 2,763.3 270.2 23.4 353.8 232.4 13.5 218.9 121.4 – 1.0 July
3,130.4 362.8 2,767.6 268.2 23.4 358.6 232.6 13.8 218.8 126.0 – 1.0 Aug.
3,126.8 359.5 2,767.3 269.0 23.2 355.1 233.0 13.7 219.4 122.1 – 1.0 Sep.
3,131.2 360.7 2,770.5 269.8 23.1 357.3 234.8 13.8 221.0 122.4 – 1.0 Oct.
3,135.5 361.4 2,774.1 268.7 23.0 362.7 237.8 14.1 223.8 124.8 – 1.0 Nov.
3,131.7 361.0 2,770.7 269.4 22.8 364.0 240.0 14.1 225.9 124.0 – 1.0 Dec.
3,130.5 359.5 2,771.0 271.0 22.7 365.8 239.4 13.8 225.6 126.4 – 1.0 2024 Jan.
3,132.4 357.0 2,775.4 272.3 22.7 369.6 240.7 14.1 226.6 128.9 – 1.0 Feb.
3,128.6 354.1 2,774.5 274.6 22.5 368.7 241.1 14.3 226.8 127.5 – 1.0 Mar.
3,132.3 353.4 2,779.0 274.2 22.4 366.3 241.9 14.3 227.5 124.4 – 1.0 Apr.
3,135.9 353.3 2,782.6 274.8 22.4 370.4 242.9 14.5 228.4 127.5 – 1.0 May
3,135.3 352.3 2,783.1 273.3 22.2 374.0 242.5 14.6 227.8 131.5 – 1.0 June
3,143.2 355.5 2,787.6 273.1 22.1 376.6 243.8 15.0 228.9 132.7 – 1.0 July
3,149.7 355.9 2,793.8 272.8 24.5 381.2 244.5 15.2 229.2 136.7 – 1.9 Aug.
3,146.3 356.1 2,790.3 273.3 24.2 383.8 245.3 15.2 230.1 138.5 – 1.9 Sep.
3,148.6 353.8 2,794.8 274.2 24.2 383.3 250.3 15.4 234.9 133.0 – 1.9 Oct.
3,158.2 352.9 2,805.3 273.8 24.3 386.3 251.6 15.7 235.9 134.7 – 1.9 Nov.
Changes *
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 +14.8 – 2.1 – 6.6 – 6.9 – 4.8 – 2.0 + 0.2 – + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 – 0.9 – 30.9 – 7.3 – 4.0 – 3.3 –23.6 – – 0.4 2016
+ 87.6 + 9.4 + 78.2 +15.8 + 0.1 – 39.9 –10.6 – 1.3 – 9.3 –29.4 – – 0.1 2017
+108.7 +19.3 + 89.4 – 6.7 – 0.9 – 37.1 –10.5 – 2.7 – 7.8 –26.6 – – 0.0 2018
+126.0 +18.9 +107.2 + 6.8 – 0.8 – 17.8 – 5.5 – 2.6 – 2.9 –12.3 – + 0.1 2019
+145.0 + 9.4 +135.5 + 0.6 + 6.1 – 2.8 – 1.1 – 1.5 + 0.4 – 1.7 – – 0.4 2020
+140.1 + 5.6 +134.5 +17.8 + 2.3 – 14.6 – 3.3 – 1.3 – 2.0 –11.3 – – 0.0 2021
+169.9 +33.5 +136.4 +14.9 – 0.1 – 15.7 + 2.5 – 0.7 + 3.3 –18.2 – – 0.0 2022
+ 46.9 +11.0 + 35.9 – 4.7 – 1.1 + 3.9 + 5.5 ± 0.0 + 5.5 – 1.5 – – 0.0 2023
– 3.2 – 1.3 – 2.0 + 4.1 – 0.3 + 1.8 – 1.5 – 0.2 – 1.2 + 3.2 – – 0.0 2023 June
+ 8.0 + 1.8 + 6.2 – 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 1.3 – 0.8 – – 0.0 July
+ 5.1 + 0.8 + 4.3 – 2.0 + 0.1 + 4.8 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.1 + 4.6 – – 0.0 Aug.
– 3.6 – 3.3 – 0.2 + 0.7 – 0.2 – 3.5 + 0.4 – 0.2 + 0.6 – 3.9 – – 0.0 Sep.
+ 4.4 + 1.1 + 3.2 + 0.8 – 0.1 + 2.1 + 1.8 + 0.2 + 1.6 + 0.3 – – 0.0 Oct.
+ 4.8 + 0.2 + 4.6 – 1.1 – 0.1 + 4.7 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 2.0 + 2.4 – + 0.0 Nov.
– 3.5 – 0.4 – 3.2 + 0.7 – 0.2 + 1.1 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 1.9 – 0.9 – – 0.0 Dec.
– 1.3 – 1.4 + 0.1 + 1.6 – 0.1 + 1.8 – 0.6 – 0.3 – 0.3 + 2.4 – + 0.0 2024 Jan.
+ 1.4 – 2.5 + 4.0 + 1.3 – + 3.5 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 2.5 – – 0.0 Feb.
– 2.6 – 2.5 – 0.1 + 2.3 – 0.2 – 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 1.4 – + 0.0 Mar.
+ 3.7 – 0.8 + 4.5 – 0.4 – 0.1 – 2.4 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.7 – 3.1 – + 0.0 Apr.
+ 3.8 – 0.1 + 3.8 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 4.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 3.1 – + 0.0 May
– 0.6 – 1.1 + 0.5 – 1.4 – 0.2 + 3.6 – 0.4 + 0.2 – 0.6 + 4.0 – – 0.0 June
+ 7.8 + 3.3 + 4.5 – 0.2 – 0.1 + 2.9 + 1.6 + 0.3 + 1.3 + 1.3 – – 0.0 July
+ 6.5 + 0.4 + 6.2 – 0.3 + 2.3 + 4.6 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 4.0 – + 0.9 Aug.
– 2.8 + 0.3 – 3.1 + 0.5 – 0.3 + 2.6 + 0.9 – 0.0 + 0.9 + 1.8 – + 0.0 Sep.
+ 7.3 – 0.1 + 7.4 + 0.9 + 0.1 – 3.2 + 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.1 – 5.5 – – 0.1 Oct.
+ 10.6 – 0.7 + 11.3 – 0.4 + 0.1 + 2.2 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 1.7 – + 0.0 Nov.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
32•
IV. Banks
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
billion €
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios)  1
of which:
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
Period TotalMortgage
loans,
total TotalMortgage
loans
secured
by
residen-
tial real
estateOther
housing
loans Totalof which:
Housing
loansManufac-
turingElectricity,
gas and
water
supply;
refuse
disposal,          
mining
and
quarryingConstruc-
tionWhole-
sale and
retail
trade;
repair of
motor                
vehicles
and
motor-
cyclesAgri-
culture,
forestry,
fishing
and
aqua-
cultureTransport-
ation and
storage;
post and                      
telecom-
munica-
tionsFinancial
intermedi-
ation
(excluding
MFIs) and
insurance   
com-
panies
Lending, total                                                 End of year or quarter *
2022 3,365.3 1,676.5 1,773.9 1,448.0 325.8 1,852.2 509.1 160.0 137.7 108.8 155.1 56.3 65.2 211.9
2023 Q3 3,401.6 1,735.7 1,797.1 1,505.7 291.5 1,878.2 522.3 160.0 134.7 113.3 159.5 56.4 61.3 223.0
Q4 3,395.7 1,740.5 1,801.7 1,512.0 289.7 1,872.8 525.7 154.6 136.1 113.3 160.2 56.0 61.5 218.1
2024 Q1 3,401.2 1,753.5 1,802.8 1,524.4 278.5 1,879.2 527.2 155.3 138.3 113.5 159.4 56.3 58.7 219.4
Q2 3,408.4 1,762.5 1,808.4 1,531.5 276.9 1,884.0 529.6 155.7 143.8 114.1 159.0 56.4 52.0 219.2
Q3 3,420.6 1,768.1 1,816.4 1,538.6 277.8 1,888.5 531.7 153.8 144.6 114.3 154.9 56.8 51.2 224.9
Short-term lending
2022 279.4 . 7.4 . 7.4 248.9 5.0 41.6 12.1 20.8 44.7 3.3 3.8 49.8
2023 Q3 274.8 . 7.5 . 7.5 244.4 5.4 40.4 5.6 22.6 47.2 3.8 3.8 51.3
Q4 264.0 . 7.4 . 7.4 233.9 5.3 37.2 5.1 22.2 46.8 3.5 4.5 47.2
2024 Q1 272.6 . 7.6 . 7.6 243.4 5.6 39.7 6.2 23.1 48.0 4.0 4.6 48.2
Q2 273.0 . 7.5 . 7.5 244.4 5.5 40.4 6.2 23.3 48.0 4.1 4.4 47.0
Q3 274.3 . 7.7 . 7.7 244.2 5.5 39.2 5.3 23.5 46.7 4.2 4.0 49.7
Medium-term lending
2022 348.7 . 43.4 . 43.4 275.8 23.5 31.2 6.5 22.2 24.3 4.1 23.0 56.2
2023 Q3 359.5 . 42.8 . 42.8 289.2 24.5 34.7 5.8 23.0 26.9 4.1 18.2 62.5
Q4 361.0 . 41.9 . 41.9 291.2 24.3 34.0 6.0 23.1 28.2 4.2 18.6 61.3
2024 Q1 354.1 . 40.8 . 40.8 285.1 24.1 32.9 5.8 22.5 27.3 4.1 15.6 61.6
Q2 352.3 . 40.0 . 40.0 284.1 23.8 33.2 11.0 22.1 27.5 4.2 9.4 61.4
Q3 356.1 . 38.9 . 38.9 288.0 23.2 34.2 10.9 21.8 25.8 4.3 9.4 64.6
Long-term lending
2022 2,737.1 1,676.5 1,723.1 1,448.0 275.1 1,327.5 480.6 87.2 119.0 65.8 86.1 48.9 38.4 105.9
2023 Q3 2,767.3 1,735.7 1,746.8 1,505.7 241.2 1,344.7 492.4 85.0 123.3 67.7 85.3 48.5 39.2 109.1
Q4 2,770.7 1,740.5 1,752.5 1,512.0 240.5 1,347.7 496.1 83.4 125.1 68.0 85.2 48.3 38.5 109.7
2024 Q1 2,774.5 1,753.5 1,754.4 1,524.4 230.1 1,350.7 497.5 82.8 126.3 68.0 84.1 48.1 38.5 109.7
Q2 2,783.1 1,762.5 1,760.9 1,531.5 229.4 1,355.5 500.3 82.0 126.7 68.7 83.5 48.1 38.2 110.8
Q3 2,790.3 1,768.1 1,769.8 1,538.6 231.2 1,356.3 503.0 80.4 128.5 69.1 82.4 48.2 37.8 110.7
Lending, total                                                 Change during quarter *
2023 Q3 + 4.7 +10.9 + 9.2 +11.2 – 2.0 – 1.4 + 4.2 – 2.5 – 2.9 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.1 – 0.6 + 1.3
Q4 – 4.9 + 5.6 + 4.8 + 7.0 – 2.2 – 4.6 + 3.4 – 5.5 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.7 – 0.5 + 0.7 – 4.9
2024 Q1 + 4.9 + 6.5 + 1.9 + 7.7 – 5.8 + 5.8 + 2.2 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 0.3 – 1.0 + 0.3 – 2.7 + 1.3
Q2 + 7.3 + 8.9 + 5.6 + 7.1 – 1.6 + 4.5 + 2.2 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.6 – 0.7 + 0.1 – 1.6 – 0.4
Q3 +13.4 + 5.5 + 8.0 + 7.1 + 0.9 + 5.8 + 2.1 – 1.9 + 0.8 + 0.2 – 4.0 + 0.3 – 0.8 + 6.8
Short-term lending
2023 Q3 – 4.8 . – 0.1 . – 0.1 – 4.7 – 0.0 – 1.9 – 2.1 – 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.9
Q4 –10.6 . – 0.2 . – 0.2 –10.2 – 0.1 – 3.1 – 0.7 – 0.4 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.7 – 4.1
2024 Q1 + 7.4 . + 0.2 . + 0.2 + 8.4 + 0.2 + 2.4 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 1.0
Q2 + 0.5 . – 0.0 . – 0.0 + 1.0 – 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.1 – 1.3
Q3 + 1.9 . + 0.1 . + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.1 – 1.2 – 0.9 + 0.1 – 1.3 + 0.1 – 0.4 + 3.4
Medium-term lending
2023 Q3 – 0.8 . – 0.2 . – 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.7 – 2.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.9 + 1.1
Q4 + 1.0 . – 0.8 . – 0.8 + 1.7 – 0.3 – 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 – 1.3
2024 Q1 – 6.5 . – 1.2 . – 1.2 – 5.7 – 0.4 – 1.1 – 0.2 – 0.6 – 0.8 – 0.0 – 2.9 + 0.4
Q2 – 2.0 . – 0.8 . – 0.8 – 1.3 – 0.3 + 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 – 1.0 – 0.3
Q3 + 3.9 . – 1.1 . – 1.1 + 4.0 – 0.6 + 1.0 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 1.6 + 0.2 – 0.1 + 3.4
Long-term lending
2023 Q3 +10.3 +10.9 + 9.5 +11.2 – 1.7 + 3.8 + 4.0 – 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.6 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.6
Q4 + 4.7 + 5.6 + 5.7 + 7.0 – 1.3 + 3.9 + 3.8 – 1.6 + 1.8 + 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.3 + 0.6
2024 Q1 + 4.0 + 6.5 + 2.9 + 7.7 – 4.7 + 3.1 + 2.4 – 0.6 + 1.0 + 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.2
Q2 + 8.9 + 8.9 + 6.4 + 7.1 – 0.7 + 4.7 + 2.6 – 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.7 – 0.7 – 0.0 – 0.4 + 1.1
Q3 + 7.6 + 5.5 + 9.0 + 7.1 + 1.8 + 1.3 + 2.6 – 1.7 + 1.7 + 0.4 – 1.0 + 0.1 – 0.4 + 0.0
* Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical breaks have been eliminatedfrom the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
visional; subsequent alterations, which appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
33•
IV. Banks
Lending to employees and other individualsLending to
non-profit institutions
Services sector (including the professions) Memo items: Other lending
of which: of which:
TotalHousing
enterprisesHolding
companiesOther
real
estate
activitiesLending
to self-
employed
persons  2Lending
to craft
enterprises TotalHousing
loans TotalInstalment
loans  3Debit
balances
on wage,
salary
and
pension
accounts Totalof which:
Housing
loans   Period
End of year or quarter *                                   Lending, total
957.4 334.0 79.9 218.2 501.7 54.1 1,495.8 1,260.1 235.7 185.9 7.1 17.3 4.6 2022
970.0 344.0 76.3 222.5 505.0 54.6 1,505.9 1,270.1 235.7 186.9 7.3 17.5 4.7 2023 Q3
973.0 346.8 75.8 223.7 504.8 54.3 1,505.7 1,271.3 234.4 185.6 7.1 17.2 4.7 Q4
978.2 348.4 78.2 222.6 505.4 55.0 1,505.1 1,271.0 234.1 186.1 7.0 17.0 4.6 2024 Q1
983.7 351.7 77.1 222.5 506.4 55.0 1,507.5 1,274.2 233.3 186.4 7.0 16.9 4.7 Q2
987.8 353.6 78.5 223.2 507.7 54.4 1,515.3 1,280.1 235.2 187.1 7.8 16.8 4.6 Q3
Short-term lending
73.0 16.1 15.6 10.8 20.4 5.0 29.9 2.4 27.5 1.7 7.1 0.6 –2022
69.7 16.2 13.2 11.6 20.6 6.5 29.9 2.1 27.8 2.2 7.3 0.6 –2023 Q3
67.4 16.0 12.6 11.3 20.6 5.7 29.5 2.1 27.5 2.2 7.1 0.6 0.0 Q4
69.7 15.1 14.5 11.4 20.9 6.9 28.8 2.0 26.8 1.9 7.0 0.5 0.0 2024 Q1
70.9 15.3 14.1 11.3 20.7 7.2 28.1 2.1 26.1 2.0 7.0 0.5 0.0 Q2
71.6 15.0 14.9 11.6 21.0 6.9 29.6 2.1 27.5 2.5 7.8 0.5 0.0 Q3
Medium-term lending
108.2 25.4 20.1 28.4 30.1 6.5 72.3 19.8 52.5 48.0 . 0.6 0.1 2022
113.9 26.5 20.8 30.9 31.1 6.2 69.7 18.2 51.5 46.9 . 0.6 0.1 2023 Q3
115.9 26.0 21.4 32.2 31.2 6.4 69.4 17.5 51.8 47.1 . 0.4 0.1 Q4
115.3 25.9 21.1 31.7 31.0 6.1 68.6 16.7 51.9 47.0 . 0.4 0.1 2024 Q1
115.3 25.4 21.1 31.9 31.0 6.1 67.7 16.2 51.6 46.6 . 0.4 0.1 Q2
117.0 25.1 22.1 32.7 30.9 6.0 67.6 15.7 51.9 47.0 . 0.5 0.0 Q3
Long-term lending
776.2 292.6 44.2 179.0 451.1 42.6 1,393.5 1,237.9 155.6 136.2 . 16.1 4.6 2022
786.5 301.3 42.3 180.0 453.3 41.9 1,406.3 1,249.8 156.4 137.8 . 16.4 4.6 2023 Q3
789.7 304.8 41.8 180.1 453.0 42.3 1,406.8 1,251.7 155.1 136.3 . 16.2 4.6 Q4
793.2 307.3 42.6 179.5 453.5 41.9 1,407.7 1,252.3 155.4 137.2 . 16.0 4.6 2024 Q1
797.5 311.0 41.9 179.2 454.7 41.7 1,411.6 1,255.9 155.7 137.8 . 16.0 4.6 Q2
799.2 313.6 41.6 178.9 455.8 41.5 1,418.1 1,262.3 155.8 137.6 . 15.9 4.6 Q3
Change during quarter *                                    Lending, total
+ 2.1 + 3.5 – 1.8 + 1.7 + 0.5 – 0.4 + 6.0 + 5.0 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 2023 Q3
+ 3.4 + 2.7 – 0.4 + 1.3 – 0.4 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 1.3 – 1.3 – 1.3 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 Q4
+ 5.0 + 1.3 + 2.4 – 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.4 + 0.8 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.1 2024 Q1
+ 5.5 + 3.1 – 1.1 + 1.7 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 2.9 + 3.4 – 0.5 + 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.0 Q2
+ 4.3 + 2.1 + 1.3 + 0.6 + 1.3 – 0.6 + 7.7 + 5.9 + 1.8 + 0.6 + 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.1 Q3
Short-term lending
– 2.3 – 0.3 – 1.0 + 0.5 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 –2023 Q3
– 2.0 – 0.2 – 0.6 – 0.2 + 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.3 + 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.0 Q4
+ 2.3 – 0.9 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.2 – 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.8 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 –2024 Q1
+ 1.3 + 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.6 + 0.1 – 0.7 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 Q2
+ 0.7 – 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.3 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.5 + 0.9 – 0.0 – 0.0 Q3
Medium-term lending
+ 0.5 + 0.6 – 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.4 – 0.4 + 0.1 – 0.1 . + 0.1 – 0.0 2023 Q3
+ 2.0 – 0.5 + 0.6 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.0 – 0.2 . – 0.2 + 0.0 Q4
– 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.8 – 0.8 + 0.1 – 0.1 . – – 0.0 2024 Q1
– 0.0 – 0.5 – 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.7 – 0.5 – 0.2 – 0.2 . + 0.0 – 0.0 Q2
+ 1.6 – 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.8 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.4 . + 0.0 – 0.0 Q3
Long-term lending
+ 3.9 + 3.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.9 – 0.2 + 6.4 + 5.5 + 0.9 + 1.0 . + 0.0 + 0.0 2023 Q3
+ 3.3 + 3.5 – 0.3 + 0.2 – 0.5 – 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.9 – 1.0 – 1.2 . – 0.1 – 0.0 Q4
+ 3.2 + 2.3 + 0.8 – 0.6 + 0.4 – 0.3 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 1.0 . – 0.2 – 0.1 2024 Q1
+ 4.3 + 3.4 – 0.7 + 1.6 + 1.0 – 0.2 + 4.2 + 3.8 + 0.4 + 0.8 . – 0.1 + 0.0 Q2
+ 2.0 + 2.8 – 0.3 – 0.4 + 1.1 – 0.3 + 6.4 + 6.4 + 0.0 – 0.3 . – 0.1 – 0.1 Q3
are not specially marked.  1 Excluding fiduciary loans.  2 Including sole proprietors. 3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
34•
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year  2
PeriodDeposits,
totalSight
deposits Totalfor up
to and
including
1 year Totalfor up
to and
including
2 yearsfor more
than
2 yearsSavings
deposits  3Bank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)Liabilities
arising
from repos
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
2021 3,976.3 2,654.6 736.0 161.0 574.9 49.7 525.2 561.2 24.5 34.2 17.1 1.3
2022 4,162.0 2,720.6 873.5 314.8 558.7 50.5 508.2 533.2 34.6 35.9 18.5 3.9
2023 4,229.0 2,540.8 1,100.1 514.7 585.4 80.5 504.9 445.9 142.2 50.1 20.3 2.9
2023 Dec. 4,229.0 2,540.8 1,100.1 514.7 585.4 80.5 504.9 445.9 142.2 50.1 20.3 2.9
2024 Jan. 4,216.3 2,496.8 1,128.7 540.7 588.0 84.3 503.8 439.4 151.4 54.5 20.4 4.9
Feb. 4,213.6 2,478.3 1,143.5 555.4 588.1 85.1 503.0 434.4 157.3 57.5 20.4 5.0
Mar. 4,239.0 2,479.2 1,168.8 578.6 590.2 87.3 502.9 430.3 160.7 60.2 20.3 4.5
Apr. 4,239.6 2,475.4 1,173.6 584.9 588.8 84.9 503.8 425.8 164.8 63.7 20.3 4.4
May 4,263.3 2,497.0 1,176.9 587.4 589.5 85.1 504.3 422.2 167.2 66.9 20.4 4.8
June 4,264.7 2,494.2 1,182.5 591.0 591.5 86.7 504.8 418.1 170.0 68.9 20.4 4.5
July 4,267.8 2,497.1 1,185.2 594.6 590.6 86.4 504.3 414.0 171.5 70.0 20.4 5.1
Aug. 4,323.3 2,548.5 1,191.1 601.4 589.7 86.1 503.6 411.2 172.5 74.5 21.0 6.5
Sep. 4,322.6 2,544.1 1,193.8 611.4 582.4 83.6 498.8 409.3 175.4 75.3 21.0 4.3
Oct. 4,329.5 2,555.1 1,200.0 616.4 583.5 83.6 499.9 407.6 166.9 73.9 21.0 5.6
Nov. 4,371.9 2,608.4 1,197.6 610.6 587.0 83.8 503.1 405.1 160.8 66.5 21.1 3.3
Changes *
2022 +191.8 + 65.8 +143.4 +152.5 – 9.1 + 0.6 – 9.7 –27.5 +10.1 + 1.7 + 1.2 + 2.6
2023 + 76.6 –172.0 +226.4 +198.4 +28.0 +29.9 – 1.9 –82.3 +104.5 + 3.5 + 1.8 – 1.0
2023 Dec. + 22.3 – 0.7 + 13.7 + 7.7 + 6.0 + 4.0 + 2.0 – 2.5 +11.8 + 1.2 – 0.4 – 3.5
2024 Jan. – 12.7 – 44.1 + 28.7 + 26.1 + 2.6 + 3.8 – 1.1 – 6.5 + 9.2 + 4.4 + 0.0 + 2.0
Feb. – 2.8 – 18.4 + 14.8 + 14.7 + 0.1 + 0.8 – 0.8 – 5.0 + 5.9 + 3.0 – 0.0 + 0.1
Mar. + 25.5 + 0.9 + 25.3 + 23.2 + 2.1 + 2.2 – 0.2 – 4.1 + 3.4 + 2.6 – 0.1 – 0.5
Apr. + 0.6 – 3.8 + 4.8 + 6.3 – 1.4 – 2.4 + 1.0 – 4.6 + 4.2 + 3.5 + 0.1 – 0.1
May + 23.7 + 21.7 + 3.1 + 2.4 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.5 – 3.5 + 2.4 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 0.4
June – 0.4 – 2.7 + 3.7 + 3.6 + 0.2 + 1.6 – 1.4 – 4.2 + 2.8 + 2.0 + 0.0 – 0.3
July + 3.1 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 3.6 – 0.9 – 0.3 – 0.6 – 4.0 + 1.5 + 1.1 – 0.0 + 0.6
Aug. + 23.5 + 19.5 + 5.8 + 6.8 – 0.9 – 0.3 – 0.6 – 2.9 + 1.0 + 4.5 + 0.5 + 1.4
Sep. – 0.7 – 4.5 + 2.7 + 10.0 – 7.3 – 2.5 – 4.8 – 1.8 + 2.9 + 0.9 + 0.0 – 2.3
Oct. + 7.1 + 11.6 – 1.8 – 0.6 – 1.2 – 0.6 – 0.6 – 1.7 – 1.0 – 1.5 + 0.1 + 1.3
Nov. + 42.7 + 52.8 – 1.6 – 5.8 + 4.3 + 0.6 + 3.6 – 2.5 – 6.1 – 7.4 + 0.1 – 2.3
Domestic government End of year or month *
2021 210.1 82.4 121.9 42.0 79.9 23.8 56.1 2.5 3.3 25.8 2.0 1.0
2022 279.8 82.5 191.6 106.8 84.9 23.1 61.7 2.0 3.7 27.3 1.9 2.4
2023 286.9 91.2 190.5 105.6 84.9 23.3 61.6 0.9 4.4 26.6 1.4 0.2
2023 Dec. 286.9 91.2 190.5 105.6 84.9 23.3 61.6 0.9 4.4 26.6 1.4 0.2
2024 Jan. 272.5 84.9 182.5 98.4 84.1 23.4 60.7 0.8 4.3 26.5 1.3 1.0
Feb. 276.6 87.8 183.7 101.4 82.4 21.0 61.3 0.8 4.3 26.7 1.3 1.2
Mar. 283.2 89.0 189.1 106.1 83.0 22.0 61.1 0.8 4.3 26.9 1.3 1.3
Apr. 266.2 81.6 179.4 99.9 79.5 18.7 60.8 0.8 4.4 26.9 1.3 0.3
May 274.8 92.1 177.5 98.4 79.1 18.4 60.7 0.7 4.5 27.0 1.3 0.8
June 284.5 95.3 184.1 104.9 79.2 19.4 59.8 0.7 4.4 26.8 1.3 0.9
July 264.1 81.0 178.2 99.2 79.1 19.4 59.6 0.6 4.2 26.6 1.3 0.9
Aug. 271.6 90.7 176.2 97.2 78.9 19.2 59.7 0.6 4.1 29.8 1.8 1.9
Sep. 269.6 88.4 176.3 104.2 72.2 17.3 54.9 0.6 4.2 29.8 1.8 0.3
Oct. 256.7 86.2 165.6 94.0 71.6 16.7 54.8 0.6 4.4 29.9 1.8 1.4
Nov. 263.4 93.2 165.3 94.1 71.2 16.7 54.5 0.6 4.3 29.9 1.8 –
Changes *
2022 + 69.1 + 0.2 + 69.2 + 64.7 + 4.5 – 0.9 + 5.4 – 0.6 + 0.3 + 1.5 – 0.1 + 1.4
2023 + 6.5 + 8.7 – 1.7 – 1.7 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 1.1 + 0.6 + 0.1 – 0.6 – 2.2
2023 Dec. + 1.7 – 1.3 + 2.9 + 1.9 + 1.1 + 1.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.7 – 0.4 – 2.0
2024 Jan. – 14.4 – 6.3 – 8.0 – 7.2 – 0.8 + 0.1 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.8
Feb. + 4.1 + 2.9 + 1.2 + 3.0 – 1.8 – 2.4 + 0.6 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.3
Mar. + 6.6 + 1.2 + 5.4 + 4.7 + 0.7 + 0.9 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.1
Apr. – 17.0 – 7.3 – 9.7 – 6.2 – 3.5 – 3.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 1.0
May + 8.6 + 10.5 – 1.9 – 1.5 – 0.5 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.5
June + 9.6 + 3.2 + 6.5 + 6.5 + 0.1 + 1.0 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.1
July – 20.4 – 14.3 – 5.9 – 5.7 – 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.0 –
Aug. + 7.5 + 9.7 – 2.1 – 1.9 – 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.1 + 3.2 + 0.5 + 1.1
Sep. – 2.5 – 2.3 – 0.3 + 6.6 – 6.9 – 2.1 – 4.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 1.6
Oct. – 13.0 – 2.2 – 10.8 – 10.2 – 0.6 – 0.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 1.1
Nov. + 6.2 + 6.6 – 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 – 1.4
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt securities.
2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12).  3 Excluding
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
35•
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont´d)
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year  2
PeriodDeposits,
totalSight
deposits Totalfor up
to and
including
1 year Totalfor up
to and
including
2 yearsfor more
than
2 yearsSavings
deposits  3Bank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)Liabilities
arising
from repos
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month *
2021 3,766.2 2,572.2 614.1 119.0 495.0 25.9 469.2 558.7 21.2 8.4 15.1 0.3
2022 3,882.2 2,638.1 681.9 208.0 473.9 27.4 446.5 531.2 31.0 8.6 16.6 1.5
2023 3,942.1 2,449.6 909.6 409.1 500.5 57.2 443.3 445.0 137.9 23.5 19.0 2.7
2023 Dec. 3,942.1 2,449.6 909.6 409.1 500.5 57.2 443.3 445.0 137.9 23.5 19.0 2.7
2024 Jan. 3,943.8 2,411.9 946.2 442.3 503.9 60.8 443.1 438.6 147.1 28.0 19.1 4.0
Feb. 3,937.0 2,390.6 959.8 454.0 505.8 64.1 441.7 433.6 153.0 30.9 19.0 3.8
Mar. 3,955.8 2,390.3 979.6 472.5 507.2 65.4 441.8 429.6 156.4 33.2 19.0 3.1
Apr. 3,973.4 2,393.8 994.2 485.0 509.2 66.2 443.0 425.0 160.5 36.8 19.0 4.1
May 3,988.5 2,404.8 999.4 489.0 510.4 66.7 443.7 421.5 162.7 39.9 19.1 4.1
June 3,980.3 2,398.9 998.4 486.1 512.3 67.3 445.0 417.4 165.6 42.1 19.2 3.7
July 4,003.7 2,416.1 1,007.0 495.4 511.6 66.9 444.6 413.4 167.2 43.4 19.2 4.3
Aug. 4,051.6 2,457.8 1,014.9 504.1 510.8 66.8 443.9 410.5 168.4 44.7 19.2 4.6
Sep. 4,053.0 2,455.7 1,017.5 507.2 510.2 66.3 443.9 408.7 171.2 45.6 19.2 4.0
Oct. 4,072.8 2,468.9 1,034.4 522.5 511.9 66.8 445.1 407.0 162.5 44.0 19.2 4.2
Nov. 4,108.4 2,515.2 1,032.2 516.5 515.8 67.2 448.6 404.5 156.5 36.6 19.3 3.3
Changes *
2022 +122.7 + 65.6 + 74.2 + 87.8 –13.6 + 1.4 –15.1 –27.0 + 9.8 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.3
2023 + 70.0 –180.7 +228.1 +200.1 +28.1 +29.8 – 1.7 –81.2 +103.8 + 3.5 + 2.4 + 1.2
2023 Dec. + 20.7 + 0.6 + 10.8 + 5.9 + 4.9 + 2.8 + 2.1 – 2.4 +11.8 + 0.5 + 0.0 – 1.5
2024 Jan. + 1.7 – 37.8 + 36.7 + 33.3 + 3.4 + 3.7 – 0.2 – 6.5 + 9.2 + 4.5 + 0.1 + 1.2
Feb. – 6.8 – 21.3 + 13.6 + 11.7 + 1.9 + 3.3 – 1.4 – 5.0 + 5.9 + 2.8 – 0.0 – 0.2
Mar. + 18.9 – 0.3 + 19.9 + 18.4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.1 – 4.1 + 3.4 + 2.4 – 0.1 – 0.6
Apr. + 17.6 + 3.5 + 14.6 + 12.5 + 2.0 + 0.8 + 1.2 – 4.6 + 4.1 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 1.0
May + 15.0 + 11.3 + 5.0 + 3.9 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.6 – 3.5 + 2.3 + 3.1 + 0.1 – 0.0
June – 10.0 – 5.9 – 2.8 – 2.9 + 0.1 + 0.6 – 0.5 – 4.1 + 2.8 + 2.2 + 0.0 – 0.4
July + 23.5 + 17.2 + 8.6 + 9.3 – 0.7 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 4.0 + 1.6 + 1.4 – 0.0 + 0.6
Aug. + 16.0 + 9.8 + 7.9 + 8.7 – 0.8 – 0.1 – 0.7 – 2.9 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.4
Sep. + 1.8 – 2.1 + 3.0 + 3.4 – 0.4 – 0.4 + 0.0 – 1.8 + 2.8 + 0.9 + 0.0 – 0.7
Oct. + 20.0 + 13.8 + 8.9 + 9.5 – 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.5 – 1.7 – 1.0 – 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.2
Nov. + 36.5 + 46.2 – 1.3 – 6.0 + 4.7 + 0.7 + 4.0 – 2.5 – 6.0 – 7.4 + 0.1 – 0.9
of which: Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2021 1,142.7 765.1 364.3 87.4 276.9 15.8 261.1 5.3 8.0 2.3 12.2 0.3
2022 1,193.5 783.4 397.1 140.8 256.3 16.8 239.5 4.4 8.6 1.9 13.5 1.5
2023 1,194.6 723.0 453.9 204.3 249.6 19.0 230.6 3.3 14.4 2.5 15.5 2.7
2023 Dec. 1,194.6 723.0 453.9 204.3 249.6 19.0 230.6 3.3 14.4 2.5 15.5 2.7
2024 Jan. 1,203.8 714.6 471.4 223.4 248.0 19.1 228.9 3.3 14.5 2.5 15.4 4.0
Feb. 1,183.1 697.1 468.1 221.6 246.5 19.1 227.4 3.2 14.7 2.7 15.4 3.8
Mar. 1,191.0 697.0 476.0 229.7 246.3 19.3 227.0 3.2 14.7 2.8 15.2 3.1
Apr. 1,197.7 700.0 479.7 232.5 247.1 19.1 228.1 3.2 14.8 2.9 15.3 4.1
May 1,203.1 709.0 475.9 228.2 247.7 19.4 228.3 3.2 15.0 3.0 15.3 4.1
June 1,183.4 697.2 467.8 218.5 249.4 19.5 229.9 3.2 15.1 3.0 15.3 3.7
July 1,207.3 719.5 469.4 220.5 248.9 19.2 229.6 3.2 15.2 3.1 15.3 4.3
Aug. 1,216.5 724.4 473.6 225.8 247.9 19.1 228.8 3.2 15.3 3.3 15.3 4.6
Sep. 1,219.8 729.0 472.2 224.6 247.6 18.9 228.7 3.2 15.4 3.2 15.3 4.0
Oct. 1,230.0 735.0 476.3 229.6 246.8 18.8 228.0 3.2 15.5 3.3 15.3 4.2
Nov. 1,236.1 745.9 471.7 220.9 250.8 18.9 231.9 3.2 15.3 3.3 15.3 3.3
Changes *
2022 + 56.2 + 17.7 + 38.8 + 52.1 –13.3 + 1.0 –14.3 – 0.9 + 0.6 – 0.5 + 1.0 + 1.3
2023 + 11.1 – 48.0 + 57.5 + 63.0 – 5.5 + 2.0 – 7.6 – 1.1 + 2.7 + 0.6 + 2.0 + 1.2
2023 Dec. – 8.7 – 4.4 – 4.3 – 4.2 – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 1.5
2024 Jan. + 9.2 – 8.5 + 17.5 + 19.1 – 1.6 + 0.1 – 1.7 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0 + 1.2
Feb. – 20.7 – 17.5 – 3.3 – 1.8 – 1.5 – 0.0 – 1.5 – 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.2
Mar. + 7.8 – 0.1 + 7.9 + 8.1 – 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.6
Apr. + 6.7 + 3.0 + 3.6 + 2.8 + 0.8 – 0.2 + 1.0 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0
May + 5.5 + 9.2 – 3.9 – 4.4 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0
June – 21.5 – 11.8 – 9.8 – 9.7 – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.4
July + 23.9 + 22.3 + 1.5 + 2.0 – 0.5 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.6
Aug. + 9.3 + 5.0 + 4.3 + 5.3 – 1.0 – 0.1 – 0.9 – + 0.1 + 0.1 – + 0.4
Sep. + 3.6 + 4.5 – 1.0 – 0.9 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.7
Oct. + 10.3 + 6.0 + 4.1 + 5.0 – 0.9 – 0.2 – 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 0.2
Nov. + 6.9 + 11.3 – 4.3 – 8.6 + 4.4 + 0.5 + 3.9 + 0.0 – 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.9
4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
36•
IV. Banks
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2
by creditor group by creditor group
Domestic households Domestic households
PeriodDeposits of
domestic
households
and
non-profit
institutions,
total Total TotalSelf-
employed
persons EmployeesOther
individualsDomestic
non-profit
institu-
tions Total TotalSelf-
employed
persons EmployeesOther
individuals
End of year or month *
2021 2,623.6 1,807.1 1,762.4 308.6 1,288.4 165.4 44.7 249.8 237.8 18.2 185.6 33.9
2022 2,688.7 1,854.7 1,809.9 307.3 1,342.5 160.1 44.8 284.8 268.7 31.2 200.5 37.1
2023 2,747.5 1,726.6 1,685.2 270.9 1,271.0 143.4 41.3 455.7 434.0 67.6 317.3 49.2
2024 June 2,796.9 1,701.7 1,660.3 262.2 1,262.0 136.1 41.4 530.5 507.8 78.3 374.5 55.0
July 2,796.4 1,696.6 1,655.6 267.6 1,253.6 134.4 41.0 537.7 515.0 79.4 380.0 55.5
Aug. 2,835.1 1,733.5 1,691.6 274.6 1,279.0 138.0 41.9 541.3 518.4 80.1 384.2 54.1
Sep. 2,833.2 1,726.7 1,684.6 268.4 1,278.5 137.8 42.0 545.2 522.6 80.9 387.4 54.3
Oct. 2,842.8 1,734.0 1,692.3 274.0 1,280.4 137.8 41.7 558.1 535.5 81.4 399.0 55.1
Nov. 2,872.4 1,769.3 1,727.7 275.9 1,311.8 140.1 41.6 560.5 538.5 81.1 402.2 55.2
Changes *
2022 + 66.5 +48.0 +47.8 – 1.5 +54.1 – 4.7 + 0.1 +35.4 +31.4 +12.9 +17.2 +1.2
2023 + 58.9 –132.7 –129.2 –36.7 –76.8 –15.7 – 3.5 +170.6 +164.9 +36.1 +116.5 +12.2
2024 June + 11.5 + 5.9 + 6.7 – 3.8 +10.3 + 0.2 – 0.8 + 7.0 + 7.0 + 0.8 + 5.9 +0.3
July – 0.5 – 5.1 – 4.7 + 5.3 – 8.4 – 1.7 – 0.4 + 7.1 + 7.2 + 1.1 + 5.6 +0.5
Aug. + 6.6 + 4.8 + 3.9 + 1.6 + 2.5 – 0.2 + 0.9 + 3.6 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 2.6 +0.1
Sep. – 1.8 – 6.6 – 6.8 – 6.1 – 0.5 – 0.2 + 0.2 + 4.0 + 4.2 + 0.8 + 3.2 +0.2
Oct. + 9.7 + 7.7 + 8.1 + 5.6 + 2.6 – 0.1 – 0.4 + 4.9 + 4.9 + 0.3 + 4.1 +0.5
Nov. + 29.5 +34.9 +35.0 + 1.8 +30.9 + 2.3 – 0.1 + 2.9 + 3.5 – 0.3 + 3.7 +0.1
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional.Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
marked.  1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group *
€ billion
Deposits
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
PeriodDomestic
government,
total TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans
End of year or month *
2021 210.1 43.5 4.2 3.2 36.0 0.1 11.7 47.4 21.7 13.8 11.3 0.6 14.1
2022 279.8 66.8 7.9 24.2 34.6 0.1 11.4 53.8 17.1 25.2 10.9 0.5 15.9
2023 286.9 52.0 9.8 6.7 35.5 0.0 11.6 51.9 19.7 21.9 9.9 0.4 15.1
2024 June 284.5 49.5 11.5 3.4 34.6 0.0 11.7 66.7 25.3 33.2 7.8 0.4 15.1
July 264.1 49.1 10.6 3.9 34.5 0.0 11.7 58.5 20.8 29.7 7.7 0.4 14.9
Aug. 271.6 49.1 10.5 4.1 34.4 0.0 11.7 60.4 22.4 29.6 8.0 0.4 18.1
Sep. 269.6 43.4 10.6 2.9 29.8 0.0 11.7 69.1 23.8 37.1 7.8 0.4 18.1
Oct. 256.7 43.6 10.0 3.9 29.6 0.0 11.7 60.5 23.0 29.4 7.6 0.4 18.2
Nov. 263.4 39.5 6.9 3.1 29.5 0.0 11.7 55.6 22.6 24.9 7.7 0.5 18.1
Changes *
2022 +69.1 +23.0 +3.5 +20.9 –1.4 –0.0 –0.3 +6.4 –4.6 +11.3 –0.3 –0.1 +1.8
2023 + 6.5 –14.8 +1.9 –17.6 +0.9 –0.0 +0.2 –2.0 +2.9 –3.7 –1.0 –0.1 –0.1
2024 June + 9.6 –0.1 +1.0 –0.4 –0.6 –0.0 –0.2 +12.4 +4.1 +8.7 –0.4 –0.0 +0.0
July –20.4 –0.4 –0.8 +0.5 –0.1 –0.0 –0.0 –8.2 –4.6 –3.5 –0.1 +0.0 –0.2
Aug. + 7.5 –0.0 –0.1 +0.1 –0.1 +0.0 –0.0 +1.9 +1.6 –0.0 +0.3 –0.0 +3.2
Sep. – 2.5 –5.6 +0.1 –1.1 –4.6 –0.0 –0.0 +8.7 +1.4 +7.4 –0.2 +0.0 +0.0
Oct. –13.0 +0.7 –0.3 +1.1 –0.1 +0.0 +0.0 –9.0 –1.1 –7.7 –0.2 +0.0 +0.1
Nov. + 6.2 –4.4 –3.5 –0.9 –0.1 – +0.1 –4.9 –0.4 –4.5 –0.0 +0.0 –0.0
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, East German Railways and Federal
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and DeutscheTelekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises ”.
Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date
are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
37•
IV. Banks
Savings deposits  3 Memo item:
by maturity
more than 1 year  2
of which:
Domestic
non-profit
institu-
tionsup to and
including
1 year Totalup to and
including
2 yearsmore than
2 years TotalDomestic
householdsDomestic
non-profit
institu-
tionsBank
savings
bonds  4Fiduciary
loansSubordinated
liabilities
(excluding
negotiable
debt
securities)  5Liabilities
arising
from repos Period
End of year or month *
12.0 31.7 218.1 10.1 208.0 553.4 547.2 6.2 13.2 6.1 2.8 –2021
16.0 67.2 217.5 10.6 206.9 526.8 521.8 5.1 22.4 6.8 3.1 –2022
21.6 204.7 251.0 38.2 212.7 441.8 438.4 3.4 123.5 21.0 3.5 –2023
22.8 267.6 262.9 47.8 215.1 414.2 411.2 3.0 150.4 39.0 3.8 –2024 June
22.7 275.0 262.7 47.7 215.0 410.2 407.3 3.0 152.0 40.3 3.9 – July
22.9 278.4 262.9 47.7 215.2 407.4 404.4 2.9 153.1 41.4 3.9 – Aug.
22.6 282.6 262.6 47.4 215.3 405.5 402.6 2.9 155.7 42.3 3.9 – Sep.
22.5 292.9 265.2 48.1 217.1 403.8 400.9 2.9 147.0 40.7 4.0 – Oct.
22.0 295.5 265.0 48.3 216.7 401.3 398.6 2.8 141.2 33.3 4.0 – Nov.
Changes *
+ 4.0 + 35.7 – 0.3 +0.5 – 0.8 –26.1 –25.0 –1.1 + 9.2 +0.7 + 0.3 –2022
+ 5.7 +137.0 +33.6 +27.8 + 5.8 –80.1 –78.4 –1.7 +101.1 +2.9 + 0.4 –2023
+ 0.0 + 6.8 + 0.2 +0.5 – 0.3 – 4.1 – 4.0 –0.1 + 2.7 +2.2 + 0.0 –2024 June
– 0.1 + 7.3 – 0.2 –0.1 – 0.1 – 4.0 – 3.9 –0.1 + 1.6 +1.3 + 0.0 – July
+ 0.2 + 3.4 + 0.2 +0.0 + 0.2 – 2.9 – 2.8 –0.0 + 1.1 +1.1 + 0.0 – Aug.
– 0.3 + 4.3 – 0.3 –0.4 + 0.1 – 1.8 – 1.8 –0.0 + 2.7 +0.9 + 0.0 – Sep.
– 0.1 + 4.6 + 0.3 +0.1 + 0.2 – 1.7 – 1.7 –0.0 – 1.1 –1.6 + 0.0 – Oct.
– 0.5 + 2.6 + 0.3 +0.2 + 0.1 – 2.5 – 2.3 –0.1 – 5.8 –7.4 + 0.0 – Nov.
registered debt securities.  2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Table IV.12).  3 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see alsofootnote 2).  4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
5 Included in time deposits.
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2,4Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans TotalSight
depositsfor up
to and
including
1 yearfor more
than
1 yearSavings
deposits
and bank
savings
bonds  2Memo
item:
Fiduciary
loans Period
End of year or month *
70.9 48.5 6.0 12.0 4.4 0.0 48.3 8.0 19.0 20.5 0.8 –2021
80.0 49.2 12.5 13.8 4.4 0.0 79.2 8.3 44.9 25.5 0.6 –2022
83.3 45.6 19.8 14.1 3.8 0.0 99.6 16.1 57.2 25.3 1.0 –2023
72.8 36.2 19.3 13.7 3.7 0.0 95.5 22.3 49.0 23.2 1.0 –2024 June
67.9 31.9 18.8 13.6 3.6 0.0 88.6 17.7 46.8 23.2 0.9 – July
76.4 39.4 19.8 13.6 3.6 0.0 85.7 18.3 43.7 22.9 0.8 – Aug.
71.9 35.6 19.2 13.5 3.6 0.0 85.2 18.3 45.0 21.1 0.8 – Sep.
70.1 35.0 18.0 13.6 3.6 0.0 82.5 18.2 42.7 20.8 0.9 – Oct.
75.8 39.7 19.1 13.4 3.5 0.0 92.5 24.0 47.2 20.5 0.8 – Nov.
Changes *
+10.2 +0.9 + 7.9 +1.3 + 0.1 – +29.6 +0.3 +24.5 +4.9 – 0.2 –2022
+3.2 –3.8 + 7.3 +0.3 – 0.6 – +20.2 +7.8 +12.4 –0.3 + 0.3 –2023
–5.0 –4.4 – 0.5 –0.0 – 0.0 – + 2.3 +2.6 – 1.3 +1.1 – 0.1 –2024 June
–5.0 –4.3 – 0.6 –0.0 – 0.0 – – 6.8 –4.6 – 2.2 +0.1 – 0.2 – July
+8.5 +7.5 + 1.1 –0.0 – 0.0 – – 2.8 +0.7 – 3.1 –0.3 – 0.1 – Aug.
–4.6 –3.8 – 0.7 –0.2 + 0.0 – – 1.0 –0.0 + 1.0 –2.0 + 0.1 – Sep.
–1.9 –0.6 – 1.2 +0.0 – 0.0 – – 2.8 –0.1 – 2.3 –0.4 + 0.0 – Oct.
+5.6 +4.6 + 1.1 –0.0 – 0.1 – +10.0 +5.8 + 4.4 –0.3 – 0.1 – Nov.
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Federal Railways Fund,
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund,
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund.  2 Including liabilities arising fromnon-negotiable bearer debt securities.  3 Including deposits under savings and loan
contracts.  4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
38•
IV. Banks
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at 3 months'
noticeat more than 3
months' notice
Period Total Total Totalof which:
Special
savings
facilities  2 Totalof which:
Special
savings
facilities  2 Totalof which:
At 3
months'
noticeMemo
item:
Interest
credited
on
savings
depositsnon-banks,
total Totalof which:
With
maturities
of more
than
2 yearsforeign
non-banks
End of year or month *
2021 567.1 561.2 537.1 269.0 24.1 14.8 5.9 5.4 1.5 24.7 24.5 19.5 0.2
2022 538.5 533.2 510.3 254.2 22.9 14.2 5.3 4.8 1.4 34.9 34.6 20.8 0.2
2023 450.5 445.9 395.3 187.1 50.6 43.0 4.6 3.8 2.6 143.2 142.2 35.5 1.0
2024 July 418.4 414.0 355.0 171.0 59.0 52.1 4.4 3.4 0.2 172.6 171.5 41.1 1.2
Aug. 415.5 411.2 352.1 170.1 59.1 52.1 4.4 3.4 0.2 173.7 172.5 41.6 1.2
Sep. 413.7 409.3 349.4 169.3 59.9 53.0 4.4 3.3 0.2 176.6 175.4 42.2 1.2
Oct. 411.9 407.6 347.0 168.7 60.6 53.8 4.4 3.3 0.2 168.1 166.9 42.0 1.2
Nov. 409.4 405.1 345.2 168.5 59.9 53.2 4.3 3.3 0.2 161.9 160.8 42.7 1.2
Changes *
2022 –28.1 –27.5 –26.4 –14.6 –1.2 –0.6 –0.6 –0.6 . +10.2 +10.1 +1.3 +0.1
2023 –83.0 –82.3 –110.0 –52.3 +27.7 +28.8 –0.7 –1.1 . +105.2 +104.5 +12.2 +0.7
2024 July –4.1 –4.0 –4.2 –1.6 +0.1 +0.2 –0.0 –0.1 . +1.5 +1.5 +0.5 +0.0
Aug. –2.9 –2.9 –2.9 –0.9 +0.1 +0.1 –0.0 –0.0 . +1.1 +1.0 +0.5 +0.0
Sep. –1.9 –1.8 –2.7 –0.8 +0.8 +0.9 –0.0 –0.0 . +3.0 +2.9 +0.6 +0.0
Oct. –1.7 –1.7 –2.5 –0.6 +0.7 +0.8 –0.0 –0.0 . –0.9 –1.0 +1.1 +0.0
Nov. –2.5 –2.5 –1.8 –0.2 –0.7 –0.6 –0.0 –0.0 . –6.1 –6.1 +0.7 –0.0
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified as timedeposits.  2 Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or
basic rate of interest.  3 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
securities.
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany *
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper
of which:
with maturities ofNon-negotiable
bearer debt
securities and
money market
paper  6 Subordinated
up to
and including 1 yearmore than 1 year up to
and including 2 years
Period TotalFloating
rate
bonds  1Zero
coupon
bonds  1,2Foreign
currency
bonds  3,4Certifi-
cates
of
deposit Totalof which:
without
a nominal
guarantee  5Totalof which:
without
a nominal
guarantee  5more
than
2 years Totalof which:
with
maturities
of more
than
2 yearsnegotiable
debt
securitiesnon-
negotiable
debt
securities
End of year or month *
2021 1,173.6 106.8 13.5 331.4 98.7 106.8 1.9 18.0 4.5 1,048.8 0.9 0.7 34.6 0.1
2022 1,231.5 92.8 15.0 307.8 88.6 98.6 1.4 26.6 3.4 1,106.4 0.8 0.7 37.8 0.1
2023 1,327.5 85.8 15.7 312.6 101.2 122.9 1.3 43.7 3.4 1,160.9 0.0 0.0 37.5 0.1
2024 July 1,351.5 97.4 16.1 303.6 79.9 96.3 1.5 53.4 3.8 1,201.9 0.1 0.0 38.7 0.1
Aug. 1,352.8 98.2 14.7 301.0 85.8 99.2 1.5 49.5 3.9 1,204.0 0.1 0.0 38.6 0.1
Sep. 1,364.2 98.8 14.8 308.3 101.4 113.7 1.4 46.8 3.9 1,203.7 0.2 0.0 39.7 0.1
Oct. 1,370.2 98.9 15.8 318.2 101.2 113.2 1.4 45.2 3.9 1,211.9 0.2 0.0 40.3 0.1
Nov. 1,369.4 98.1 16.2 320.7 106.1 118.4 1.4 44.6 4.0 1,206.4 0.2 0.0 40.9 0.1
Changes *
2022 +59.1 –12.7 +1.1 –23.6 –9.9 –8.3 – 0.5 +8.5 –1.1 +58.9 –0.1 +0.1 +3.5 –
2023 +97.0 –6.3 +1.4 +4.4 +11.4 +24.5 – 0.0 +17.7 +0.6 +54.8 +0.0 +0.1 –0.3 –
2024 July –17.8 +1.6 +0.2 –17.3 –10.5 –11.0 + 0.1 +0.2 +0.1 –7.0 –0.0 –0.0 –0.0 –
Aug. + 0.2 +0.8 –0.4 –3.7 +4.5 +3.0 – 0.0 –3.8 +0.1 +1.1 +0.0 +0.0 –0.1 –
Sep. +11.4 +0.6 +0.1 +7.3 +15.6 +14.5 – 0.1 –2.7 –0.1 –0.4 +0.0 –0.0 +1.1 –
Oct. + 6.0 +0.1 +1.0 +9.9 –0.2 –0.6 + 0.0 –1.7 +0.1 +8.2 +0.0 +0.0 +0.6 –
Nov. – 0.8 –0.7 +0.4 +2.4 +4.9 +5.2 + 0.0 –0.6 +0.1 –5.5 – – +0.6 –
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.
1 Including debt securities denominated in foreign currencies.  2 Issue value when
floated.  3 Including floating rate notes and zero coupon bonds denominated in foreigncurrencies.  4 Bonds denominated in non-euro area currencies.  5 Negotiable bearer debt
securities and money market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%.
6 Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see
also Table IV.10, footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
39•
IV. Banks
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany *
Interim statements
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks
(MFIs)  6Deposits of non-
banks (non-MFIs)
Building loans
End of
year/monthNum-
ber
of
associ-
ationsBalance
sheet
total  1Credit
bal-
ances
and
loans
(ex-
cluding
building
loans)  2Building
loans  3Bank
debt
secur-
ities  4Loans
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsInterim
and
bridging
loansOther
building
loansSecur-
ities (in-
cluding
Treasury
bills
and
Treasury
discount
paper)  5Deposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsSight
and time
depositsDeposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsSight and
time de-
posits  7Bearer
debt
secur-
ities
out-
stand-
ingCapital
(includ-
ing pub-
lished
re-
serves)  8Memo
item:
New
con-
tracts
entered
into in
year or
month  9
All building and loan associations
2023 15 259.5 25.6 0.1 15.9 15.7 135.0 41.3 21.8 1.2 36.8 183.2 10.7 6.6 13.0 98.2
2024 Sep. 13 260.9 24.6 0.2 15.5 19.8 133.7 42.0 20.6 0.8 37.8 179.3 14.3 7.1 13.2 6.7
Oct. 13 261.5 25.2 0.2 15.5 20.3 133.4 41.9 20.7 0.8 37.9 179.0 14.6 7.6 13.2 7.6
Nov. 13 261.0 24.5 0.2 15.3 20.6 133.2 42.0 20.7 0.8 37.7 178.9 14.5 7.5 13.2 5.7
Private building and Ioan associations
2024 Sep. 8 185.5 11.6 0.2 9.0 13.0 103.3 35.9 9.3 0.2 34.8 114.9 14.0 7.1 9.0 4.3
Oct. 8 186.2 12.3 0.2 9.0 13.3 103.1 36.0 9.4 0.2 35.0 114.7 14.3 7.6 9.0 5.0
Nov. 8 185.8 11.8 0.2 8.8 13.5 102.9 36.1 9.5 0.2 34.8 114.6 14.2 7.5 9.0 3.6
Public building and Ioan associations
2024 Sep. 5 75.4 12.9 0.0 6.6 6.7 30.3 6.1 11.3 0.6 3.0 64.4 0.3 – 4.2 2.4
Oct. 5 75.3 12.9 0.0 6.5 6.9 30.3 5.9 11.3 0.6 2.9 64.4 0.3 – 4.2 2.5
Nov. 5 75.3 12.8 0.0 6.5 7.1 30.3 5.9 11.2 0.6 2.8 64.4 0.3 – 4.2 2.1
Trends in building and loan association business
€ billion
Capital promised Capital disbursed Changes in deposits
under savings and
loan contracts AllocationsDisbursement
commitments
outstanding at
end of periodInterest and
repayments
received on
building loans  11
Deposits under
savings and
loan contractsLoans under
savings and
loan contracts  10
PeriodAmounts
paid into
savings
and
loan ac-
counts  10Interest
credited
on
deposits
under
savings
and loan
con-
tractsRepay-
ments
of
deposits
under
cancelled
savings
and
loan
con-
tracts Totalof
which:
Net
alloca-
tions  12 Total Totalof which:
Applied
to settle-
ment of
interim
and
bridging
loans Totalof which:
Applied
to settle-
ment of
interim
and
bridging
loansNewly
granted
interim
and
bridging
loans
and
other
building
loans Totalof
which:
Under
alloc-
ated
con-
tracts Totalof
which:
Repay-
ments
during
quarterMemo
item:
Housing
bonuses
re-
ceived  13
All building and loan associations
2023 27.0 1.9 6.4 52.0 40.3 49.9 25.9 4.2 8.7 4.4 15.3 12.6 7.3 4.9 4.1 0.2
2024 Sep. 2.0 0.0 0.5 4.0 3.0 3.8 1.8 0.4 0.9 0.4 1.1 11.6 7.4 0.5 1.1 0.0
Oct. 2.1 0.0 0.5 4.3 3.2 3.9 1.9 0.4 0.9 0.4 1.1 11.6 7.5 0.5 . 0.0
Nov. 2.1 0.0 0.4 4.1 3.0 3.6 1.8 0.4 0.8 0.4 1.0 11.6 7.6 0.5 . 0.0
Private building and Ioan associations
2024 Sep. 1.3 0.0 0.3 2.8 1.9 2.7 1.2 0.3 0.6 0.3 0.9 7.5 4.1 0.4 0.7 0.0
Oct. 1.3 0.0 0.3 3.0 2.2 2.8 1.3 0.3 0.6 0.4 0.9 7.4 4.1 0.4 . 0.0
Nov. 1.3 0.0 0.2 2.8 2.0 2.5 1.3 0.3 0.4 0.3 0.8 7.5 4.2 0.4 . 0.0
Public building and Ioan associations
2024 Sep. 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.3 1.1 1.2 0.6 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.2 3.4 0.1 0.4 0.0
Oct. 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.3 1.0 1.2 0.6 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.1 3.4 0.1 . 0.0
Nov. 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.2 1.0 1.1 0.6 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.2 4.1 3.4 0.1 . 0.0
* Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures for
the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which
appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 See Table IV.2,
footnote 1.  2 Including claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from
registered debt securities and central bank credit balances.  3 Loans under savings and
loan contracts and interim and bridging loans.  4 Including money market paper and
small amounts of other securities issued by banks.  5 Including equalisation claims.
6 Including liabilities to building and loan associations.  7 Including small amounts of
savings deposits.  8 Including participation rights capital and fund for general bankingrisks. 9 Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as
new contracts.  10 For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
arising from the allocation of contracts see "Capital disbursed".  11 Including housing
bonuses credited.  12 Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans.  13 The amounts already
credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in "Amounts paid into
savings and loan accounts" and "Interest and repayments received on building loans".

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
40•
IV. Banks
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other assets  7
Credit balances and loans Loans
PeriodGerman
banks
(MFIs)
with
foreign
branches
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diaries 
 
foreign
branches  1
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diariesBalance
sheet
total  7 Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2,3 Total Totalto
German
non-
banksto
foreign
non-
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2 Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio
Foreign branches                                               End of year or month *
2021 51 207 1,504.5 471.2 457.8 297.9 159.9 13.4 497.2 418.8 12.9 405.9 78.4 536.1 404.5
2022 47 202 1,625.5 461.8 447.4 315.6 131.8 14.4 516.7 447.7 9.7 437.9 69.0 647.0 513.3
2023 47 200 1,544.2 457.5 437.7 304.4 133.3 19.8 507.9 421.0 5.4 415.6 86.9 578.8 417.0
2024 Jan. 47 200 1,580.2 471.1 450.1 310.0 140.1 21.0 518.6 425.0 5.1 419.9 93.6 590.5 402.9
Feb. 47 200 1,620.1 486.0 464.7 322.5 142.2 21.3 517.5 424.8 5.0 419.9 92.7 616.7 425.7
Mar. 47 199 1,634.7 506.6 483.8 327.2 156.6 22.8 523.9 431.4 5.1 426.3 92.6 604.1 428.8
Apr. 47 199 1,668.0 499.4 474.9 325.7 149.3 24.4 520.3 432.4 4.8 427.5 88.0 648.2 477.1
May 47 199 1,647.4 504.5 482.0 330.9 151.1 22.4 528.0 440.3 4.9 435.5 87.7 614.9 439.2
June 47 198 1,612.4 498.6 478.8 329.8 148.9 19.9 538.5 449.1 4.9 444.2 89.3 575.3 421.0
July 47 198 1,596.9 505.8 485.8 328.1 157.7 19.9 539.9 450.4 5.2 445.2 89.5 551.3 384.7
Aug. 47 195 1,594.9 499.8 479.7 324.4 155.3 20.1 543.0 453.3 5.3 448.0 89.8 552.1 380.5
Sep. 47 195 1,598.5 499.1 478.8 322.5 156.3 20.4 568.4 477.9 5.1 472.8 90.5 530.9 372.4
Oct. 47 197 1,645.8 503.1 482.0 333.2 148.9 21.0 579.7 492.9 4.9 488.0 86.8 563.0 393.0
Changes *
2022 –4 –5 +124.1 –13.3 –14.3 +17.8 –32.1 +1.0 +6.7 +17.5 –3.2 +20.6 –10.8 +108.1 +103.0
2023 ±0 –2 –83.7 –2.7 –8.1 –12.1 +4.0 +5.4 –1.4 –20.2 –4.4 –15.8 +18.8 – 68.1 –94.4
2024 Feb. ±0 – +39.9 +15.1 +14.8 +12.5 +2.3 +0.3 –1.0 –0.0 –0.1 +0.1 –0.9 + 26.2 +22.8
Mar. ±0 –1 +14.4 +20.6 +19.1 +4.7 +14.4 +1.5 +6.2 +6.3 +0.2 +6.2 –0.1 – 12.6 + 3.0
Apr. ±0 – +32.9 –7.5 –9.2 –1.5 –7.7 +1.6 –5.4 –0.6 –0.3 –0.3 –4.8 + 43.7 +48.1
May ±0 – –19.9 +6.2 +8.2 +5.2 +3.0 –2.0 +10.8 +10.8 +0.0 +10.7 +0.0 – 32.6 –37.5
June ±0 –1 –35.7 –7.1 –4.5 –1.1 –3.4 –2.6 +6.6 +5.4 +0.1 +5.3 +1.2 – 40.3 –18.8
July ±0 – –15.0 +7.3 +7.2 –1.7 +9.0 +0.1 +3.7 +3.2 +0.2 +3.0 +0.4 – 24.0 –36.0
Aug. ±0 –3 –0.8 –4.4 –4.5 –3.7 –0.8 +0.1 +8.8 +7.9 +0.1 +7.8 +1.0 + 0.8 – 3.0
Sep. ±0 – +4.1 –0.0 –0.3 –1.9 +1.6 +0.3 +27.5 +26.5 –0.2 +26.7 +1.0 – 21.2 – 7.8
Oct. ±0 +2 +46.0 +2.1 +1.4 +10.7 –9.3 +0.7 +4.4 +9.0 –0.2 +9.2 –4.5 + 30.8 +19.5
Foreign subsidiaries 8                                           End of year or month *
2021 12 35 246.0 50.8 44.4 20.7 23.7 6.3 139.5 116.3 12.6 103.7 23.2 55.7 0.0
2022 11 32 256.7 61.5 52.0 20.5 31.4 9.5 145.8 124.5 13.3 111.2 21.3 49.4 0.0
2023 12 31 264.0 74.5 63.9 25.7 38.2 10.6 146.4 125.2 11.9 113.4 21.1 43.1 0.0
2023 Mar. 11 32 253.9 62.2 51.7 20.7 31.0 10.5 146.5 126.2 13.3 112.9 20.2 45.2 0.0
Apr. 11 31 250.9 64.4 53.3 22.4 30.9 11.1 145.3 125.6 13.0 112.6 19.8 41.2 0.0
May 11 31 250.9 59.3 48.8 21.5 27.2 10.5 146.2 126.3 12.8 113.5 19.9 45.5 0.0
June 12 32 253.3 64.2 52.8 22.4 30.4 11.5 146.6 126.7 12.7 113.9 19.9 42.5 0.0
July 12 31 253.4 63.6 52.2 23.0 29.3 11.4 147.4 126.9 12.9 114.1 20.5 42.4 0.0
Aug. 12 31 252.8 62.8 52.2 21.9 30.3 10.6 146.0 125.6 12.7 112.9 20.4 44.1 0.0
Sep. 12 31 256.2 66.4 56.0 25.0 31.0 10.5 146.7 125.8 12.3 113.5 20.9 43.0 0.0
Oct. 12 31 257.4 65.8 56.0 24.5 31.5 9.8 146.8 126.2 12.0 114.2 20.6 44.8 0.0
Nov. 12 31 259.9 66.9 57.7 23.6 34.1 9.3 147.8 126.9 12.1 114.8 20.9 45.2 0.0
Dec. 12 31 264.0 74.5 63.9 25.7 38.2 10.6 146.4 125.2 11.9 113.4 21.1 43.1 0.0
Changes *
2022 –1 –3 +6.5 +8.2 +5.2 –0.2 +5.6 +2.8 +5.0 +6.9 +0.7 +6.3 –1.9 – 6.5 ± 0.0
2023 +1 –1 +8.7 +13.5 +12.2 +5.2 +7.1 +1.2 +1.5 +1.7 –1.4 +3.1 –0.2 – 6.3 ± 0.0
2023 Apr. – –1 –2.7 +2.2 +1.6 +1.7 –0.1 +0.6 –0.8 –0.4 –0.3 –0.1 –0.5 – 4.1 ± 0.0
May – – –1.5 –5.7 –4.9 –0.8 –4.1 –0.7 –0.1 –0.3 –0.2 –0.0 +0.1 + 4.3 ± 0.0
June +1 +1 +3.2 +5.3 +4.2 +0.9 +3.3 +1.0 +0.9 +0.9 –0.0 +0.9 +0.0 – 3.0 ± 0.0
July – –1 +0.6 –0.5 –0.4 +0.6 –1.0 –0.1 +1.2 +0.7 +0.1 +0.5 +0.6 – 0.1 ± 0.0
Aug. – – –1.2 –1.0 –0.2 –1.0 +0.8 –0.9 –1.8 –1.7 –0.2 –1.5 –0.1 + 1.7 ± 0.0
Sep. – – +2.2 +3.2 +3.5 +3.0 +0.5 –0.2 –0.0 –0.5 –0.4 –0.1 +0.5 – 1.0 ± 0.0
Oct. – – +1.4 –0.6 +0.1 –0.4 +0.5 –0.7 +0.2 +0.5 –0.3 +0.8 –0.3 + 1.8 ± 0.0
Nov. – – +3.8 +1.5 +2.0 –0.9 +2.9 –0.4 +1.8 +1.5 +0.1 +1.5 +0.3 + 0.4 ± 0.0
Dec. – – +4.5 +7.7 +6.3 +2.1 +4.2 +1.4 –1.1 –1.3 –0.2 –1.1 +0.3 – 2.0 ± 0.0
* In this table "foreign" also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from
the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are alwaysto be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following
Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Several branches in a given country of
domicile are regarded as a single branch.  2 Treasury bills, Treasury discount paper

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
41•
IV. Banks
Deposits Other liabilities  6,7
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4
Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banks Total Total 
Shortterm 
Medium
and
longtermForeign
non-banksMoney
market
paper
and debt
securities
outstand-
ing 5Working
capital
and own
funds Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio Period
End of year or month *                  Foreign branches
950.2 638.5 461.2 177.3 311.7 8.1 6.3 1.8 303.6 65.2 51.3 437.9 403.4 2021
943.4 573.6 435.2 138.5 369.8 10.4 8.9 1.5 359.4 61.7 63.1 557.4 512.9 2022
943.5 554.5 422.6 131.9 389.0 10.6 9.5 1.2 378.4 64.1 66.1 470.5 418.3 2023
967.4 573.0 433.0 140.0 394.4 11.0 9.8 1.2 383.4 88.2 69.1 455.4 404.8 2024 Jan.
984.5 586.5 443.4 143.1 398.0 10.7 9.7 1.0 387.3 88.5 69.2 477.9 427.6 Feb.
997.2 587.3 442.4 144.9 409.9 11.3 10.3 1.0 398.6 86.3 69.4 481.8 431.6 Mar.
978.9 576.4 435.8 140.6 402.5 11.1 10.1 1.0 391.4 88.0 69.2 531.8 479.3 Apr.
998.2 591.9 449.7 142.1 406.3 14.8 13.9 1.0 391.5 85.8 69.0 494.4 443.4 May
986.4 578.3 450.5 127.8 408.0 14.2 13.2 1.0 393.8 81.7 69.5 474.7 423.1 June
999.5 583.6 450.6 133.0 415.9 14.3 13.4 1.0 401.6 87.0 69.3 441.1 388.9 July
1,002.4 591.0 457.1 133.9 411.4 14.9 13.9 1.0 396.6 85.5 69.1 437.8 385.0 Aug.
1,014.0 602.5 466.1 136.4 411.5 13.4 12.5 0.9 398.0 84.7 70.1 429.7 377.0 Sep.
1,040.4 610.4 472.5 137.9 430.0 13.9 13.0 1.0 416.1 81.7 70.8 453.0 397.1 Oct.
Changes *
– 6.2 –64.2 –22.2 –42.0 + 58.0 + 2.3 + 2.6 – 0.3 +55.7 – 6.3 +11.8 +119.0 + 109.5 2022
+ 1.2 –17.0 –13.8 – 3.1 + 18.1 + 1.2 + 1.5 – 0.3 +16.9 + 3.9 + 3.0 – 88.0 – 94.5 2023
+17.2 +13.7 +10.5 +3.2 + 3.5 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 + 3.8 + 0.3 +0.1 + 22.5 + 22.8 2024 Feb.
+12.7 +0.7 –1.0 +1.8 +11.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 – 0.1 +11.4 – 2.3 +0.1 + 4.0 + 4.0 Mar.
–18.8 –11.4 –6.6 –4.8 – 7.4 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 7.3 + 1.3 –0.2 + 50.0 + 47.7 Apr.
+20.5 +16.6 +13.9 +2.7 + 3.9 + 3.7 + 3.7 – 0.0 + 0.1 – 1.5 –0.2 – 37.4 – 35.9 May
–13.2 –14.7 +0.7 –15.5 + 1.5 – 0.6 – 0.6 + 0.0 + 2.2 – 4.8 +0.5 – 19.7 – 20.3 June
+13.5 +5.5 +0.1 +5.4 + 8.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 + 7.9 + 5.7 –0.2 – 33.6 – 34.2 July
+ 4.9 +9.0 +6.5 +2.5 – 4.1 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.0 – 4.7 – 0.3 –0.2 – 3.3 – 3.6 Aug.
+12.3 +12.1 +9.0 +3.1 + 0.2 – 1.4 – 1.4 – 0.1 + 1.6 – 0.4 +1.0 – 8.1 – 8.0 Sep.
+24.2 +6.1 +6.4 –0.3 +18.1 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.0 +17.6 – 4.4 +0.7 + 23.3 + 20.1 Oct.
End of year or month * Foreign subsidiaries 8
178.6 64.2 33.0 31.2 114.4 7.3 4.9 2.4 107.1 16.4 20.3 30.7 0.0 2021
189.4 67.5 38.6 28.9 122.0 6.9 4.6 2.3 115.1 13.5 20.1 33.7 0.0 2022
195.9 76.0 51.2 24.8 119.9 6.4 4.0 2.4 113.4 12.1 20.8 35.3 0.0 2023
186.6 71.2 42.2 29.1 115.4 6.8 4.3 2.5 108.5 12.3 20.3 34.8 0.0 2023 Mar.
183.5 71.0 44.0 27.0 112.5 6.9 4.5 2.5 105.6 12.2 20.2 35.0 0.0 Apr.
183.9 71.2 43.6 27.6 112.8 6.9 4.4 2.5 105.9 12.1 20.6 34.3 0.0 May
185.6 71.9 45.4 26.5 113.7 6.6 4.2 2.4 107.1 10.6 20.5 36.6 0.0 June
187.9 72.3 47.0 25.3 115.6 6.8 4.4 2.4 108.8 10.5 20.5 34.4 0.0 July
185.5 70.6 46.0 24.7 114.8 6.6 4.2 2.4 108.2 10.3 20.6 36.4 0.0 Aug.
188.2 74.1 49.1 25.1 114.1 6.7 4.3 2.4 107.4 11.3 20.5 36.0 0.0 Sep.
189.3 73.1 48.3 24.8 116.2 6.5 4.1 2.4 109.7 11.6 20.8 35.8 0.0 Oct.
192.1 73.7 48.4 25.3 118.4 6.5 4.1 2.4 111.8 11.6 20.8 35.4 0.0 Nov.
195.9 76.0 51.2 24.8 119.9 6.4 4.0 2.4 113.4 12.1 20.8 35.3 0.0 Dec.
Changes *
+ 7.7 + 1.4 + 5.6 – 4.2 + 6.3 – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.1 + 6.7 – 2.9 – 0.2 + 2.2 ± 0.0 2022
+ 7.6 + 8.9 +12.6 – 3.8 – 1.3 – 0.4 – 0.5 + 0.1 – 0.8 – 1.4 + 0.7 + 1.8 ± 0.0 2023
– 2.7 –0.1 +1.8 –1.9 – 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0 – 2.7 – 0.1 –0.1 + 0.2 ± 0.0 2023 Apr.
– 0.6 –0.3 –0.4 +0.2 – 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0 – 0.4 – 0.0 +0.4 – 1.2 ± 0.0 May
+ 2.3 +1.0 +1.8 –0.9 + 1.3 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 + 1.6 – 1.6 –0.1 + 2.5 ± 0.0 June
+ 2.7 +0.6 +1.6 –1.1 + 2.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 2.0 – 0.0 +0.0 – 2.1 ± 0.0 July
– 2.9 –1.9 –1.0 –0.8 – 1.1 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.9 – 0.2 +0.1 + 1.8 ± 0.0 Aug.
+ 1.9 +3.2 +3.1 +0.1 – 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0 – 1.4 + 1.0 –0.1 – 0.7 ± 0.0 Sep.
+ 1.2 –1.0 –0.8 –0.2 + 2.2 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 2.3 + 0.2 +0.3 – 0.2 ± 0.0 Oct.
+ 3.7 +0.9 +0.1 +0.8 + 2.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 2.8 + 0.1 +0.0 – 0.0 ± 0.0 Nov.
+ 4.1 +2.4 +2.8 –0.4 + 1.7 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.0 + 1.8 + 0.4 +0.0 + 0.0 ± 0.0 Dec.
and other money market paper, debt securities.  3 Including own debt securities.
4 Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities.  5 Issues of
negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money market paper.  6 Includingsubordinated liabilities.  7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1.  8 The collection of data
regarding foreign subsidiaries matured in 12/2023.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
42•
V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2Required reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4 Current accounts  5Excess reserves
(without deposit
facility)  6 Deficiencies  7
2017 12,415.8 124.2 123.8 1,275.2 1,151.4 0.0
2018 12,775.2 127.8 127.4 1,332.1 1,204.8 0.0
2019 13,485.4 134.9 134.5 1,623.7 1,489.3 0.0
2020 14,590.4 145.9 145.5 3,029.4 2,883.9 0.0
2021 15,576.6 155.8 155.4 3,812.3 3,656.9 0.1
2022 16,843.0 168.4 168.0 195.6 28.1 0.0
2023 16,261.6 162.6 162.3 170.5 8.2 0.0
p 2024 Oct. 16,355.6 163.6 163.2 168.1 4.9 0.0
Nov. . . . . . .
p Dec. 16,422.2 164.2 163.9 ... ... ...
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Reserve base  2German share of
euro area reserve base
as a percentageRequired reserves
before deduction of
lump-sum allowance  3Required reserves
after deduction of
lump-sum allowance  4Current accounts  5Excess reserves
(without deposit
facility)  6 Deficiencies  7
2017 3,456,192 27.8 34,562 34,404 424,547 390,143 2
2018 3,563,306 27.9 35,633 35,479 453,686 418,206 1
2019 3,728,027 27.6 37,280 37,131 486,477 449,346 0
2020 4,020,792 27.6 40,208 40,062 878,013 837,951 1
2021 4,260,398 27.4 42,604 42,464 1,048,819 1,006,355 0
2022 4,664,630 27.7 46,646 46,512 54,848 8,337 5
2023 4,483,853 27.6 44,839 44,709 47,008 2,299 0
p 2024 Oct. 4,485,215 27.4 44,852 44,726 46,053 1,327 0
Nov. . . . . . . .
p Dec. 4,517,828 27.5 45,178 45,052 ... ... ...
a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Big banksRegional banks
and other
commercial banksBranches of
foreign banksLandesbanken and
savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banksBanks with special,
development and
other central
support tasks
2017 6,366 5,678 3,110 11,163 6,256 132 1,699
2018 7,384 4,910 3,094 11,715 6,624 95 1,658
2019 7,684 5,494 2,765 12,273 7,028 109 1,778
2020 8,151 6,371 3,019 12,912 7,547 111 2,028
2021 9,113 6,713 2,943 13,682 8,028 109 1,876
2022 9,814 7,396 3,216 14,465 8,295 117 2,471
2023 9,282 7,417 3,170 14,061 8,178 148 2,118
2024 Oct. 9,447 7,428 2,746 14,293 8,388 138 2,075
Nov. . . . . . . .
Dec. 9,561 7,484 2,856 14,355 8,417 133 2,156
b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
€ billion
Maintenance
period
beginning in  1Liabilities (excluding savings
deposits, deposits with build-
ing and loan associations
and repos) to non-MFIs with
agreed maturities of up to 2
yearsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed maturities
of up to 2 years to MFIs that are
resident in euro area countries but
not subject to minimum reserve
requirementsLiabilities (excluding repos and
deposits with building and loan
associations) with agreed
maturities of up to 2 years to
banks in non-euro area countriesSavings deposits with agreed
periods of notice of up
to 2 yearsLiabilities arising from bearer debt
securities issued with agreed matu-
rities of up to 2 years and bearer
money market paper after deduction
of a standard amount for bearer debt
certificates or deduction of such
paper held by the reporting
institution
2017 2,338,161 628 415,084 581,416 120,894
2018 2,458,423 1,162 414,463 576,627 112,621
2019 2,627,478 1,272 410,338 577,760 111,183
2020 2,923,462 1,607 436,696 560,770 105,880
2021 3,079,722 9,030 508,139 561,608 101,907
2022 3,352,177 12,609 566,227 543,694 116,094
2023 3,447,513 968 420,839 455,493 125,531
2024 Oct. 3,585,156 2,329 340,110 410,048 126,500
Nov. . . . . .
Dec. 3,608,785 2,148 356,674 406,283 134,680
1 The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main refinancing
operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB for
which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled.  2 Article 5 of the
Regulation (EU) 2021/378 of the European Central Bank on the application of minimum
reserve requirements (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies,
pursuant to Article 6(1)(a)).  3 Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was 2%between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it has stood at
1%. 4 Article 6(2) of the Regulation (EU) 2021/378 of the European Central Bank on the
application of minimum reserve requirements.  5 Average credit balances of credit
institutions at national central banks.  6 Average credit balances less required reserves
after deduction of the lump-sum allowance.  7 Required reserves after deduction of the
lump-sum allowance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
43•
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / basic rates of interest
% per annum
ECB interest rates Basic rates of interest
Main refinancing
operationsMain refinancing
operations
Applicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1Applicable
fromBasic 
rate of
interest 
as per 
Civil
Code  1
2015 Dec. 9 – 0.30 0.05 – 0.30 2023 Feb. 8 2.50 3.00 – 3.25 2011 July 1 0.37 2015 Jan. 1 – 0.83
Mar. 22 3.00 3.50 – 3.75
2016 Mar. 16 – 0.40 0.00 – 0.25 May 10 3.25 3.75 – 4.00 2012 Jan. 1 0.12 2016 July 1 – 0.88
June 21 3.50 4.00 – 4.25
2019 Sep. 18 – 0.50 0.00 – 0.25 Aug. 2 3.75 4.25 – 4.50 2013 Jan. 1 – 0.13 2023 Jan. 1 1.62
Sep. 20 4.00 4.50 – 4.75 July 1 – 0.38 July 1 3.12
2022 July 27 0.00 0.50 – 0.75
Sep. 14 0.75 1.25 – 1.50 2024 June 12 3.75 4.25 – 4.50 2014 Jan. 1 – 0.63 2024 Jan. 1 3.62
Nov. 2 1.50 2.00 – 2.25 Sep. 18 2 3.50 3.65 – 3.90 July 1 – 0.73 July 1 3.37
Dec. 21 2.00 2.50 – 2.75 Oct.  23 3.25 3.40 – 3.65
Dec.  18 3.00 3.15 – 3.40 2025 Jan. 1 2.27
1 Pursuant to Section 247 of the Civil Code.  2 Effective 18 September 2024, the spread
between the rate on the main refinancing operations and the deposit facility rate will
be reduced to 15 basis points. The spread between the rate on the marginal lendingfacility and the rate on the main refinancing operations will remain unchanged at 25
basis points.
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid
amountAllotment
amount Fixed rateMinimum
bid rate Marginal rate  1Weighted
average rate
Date of
Settlement € million % per annumRunning for
… days
Main refinancing operations
2024 Dec. 11 4 872 4 872 3.40 – – – 7
Dec. 18 7 952 7 952 3.15 – – – 5
Dec. 23 8 880 8 880 3.15 – – – 7
Dec. 30 16 979 16 979 3.15 – – – 9
2025 Jan. 8 9 984 9 984 3.15 – – – 7
Jan. 15 8 039 8 039 3.15 – – – 7
Long-term refinancing operations
2024 Sep. 25 6 823 6 823 2   3.48 – – − 84
Oct. 30 1 862 1 862 2      … – – − 91
Nov. 27 4 305 4 305 2      … – – − 91
Dec. 18 11 027 11 027 2      … – – − 98
* Source: ECB.  1 Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or
collected.  2 Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at: a) the
average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of thisoperation including a spread or b) the average deposit facility rate over the life of this
operation.
3. Money market rates, by month
% per annum
EURIBOR ®  2
Monthly
average €STR  1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Twelve-month funds
2024 May 3.907 3.881 3.816 3.813 3.787 3.680
June 3.749 3.681 3.635 3.725 3.715 3.650
July 3.663 3.611 3.618 3.685 3.644 3.526
Aug. 3.663 3.626 3.597 3.548 3.425 3.166
Sep. 3.557 3.491 3.438 3.434 3.258 2.936
Oct. 3.338 3.308 3.205 3.167 3.002 2.691
Nov. 3.164 3.148 3.066 3.007 2.788 2.506
Dec. 3.064 3.029 2.890 2.825 2.632 2.436
* Publication does not establish an entitlement to provision of the rates. The Deutsche
Bundesbank reserves the right to cease publishing the information on its website in
future. All data are supplied without liability. No explicit or implicit assurances or
guarantees are made as to the up-to-dateness, accuracy, timeliness, completeness,
marketability or suitability of the data as interest rates or reference interest rates.
Neither the European Money Markets Institute (EMMI), nor Euribor EBF, nor Euribor
ACI, nor the Euribor Panel Banks, nor the Euribor Steering Committee, nor the
European Central Bank, nor Reuters, nor the Deutsche Bundesbank can be held liable
for any irregularity or inaccuracy, incompleteness or late provision of the money market
rates. With regard to the €STR please consider the European Central Bank's disclaimer,
which also applies for the Deutsche Bundesbank's publication:
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/financial_markets_and_interest_rates/euro_short-
term_rate/html/index.en.html
1 Euro Short-Term Rate: On the basis of individual euro-denominated transactions
conducted and settled on the previous business day, the European Central Bankpublishes the €STR since 2 October 2019. Transactions are reported by euro area banks
subject to reporting obligations in compliance with Money Market Statistical Reporting
Regulation. Monthly averages are calculations by Deutsche Bundesbank.  2 Monthly
averages are own calculations by Deutsche Bundesbank based on Euribor® daily rates
calculated by the European Money Markets Institute (EMMI). These are unweighted
averages. Information on the methodology of Euribor® daily rates are available below.
Please be aware that commercial use of these data is only possible with a licence
agreement with the European Money Markets Institute (EMMI). Information on its
terms of use are available under the link below. Values calculated from November 2023
onwards with three decimal places. Previous values calculated with two decimal places.
For technical reasons, these values are also displayed with three decimal places and the
third decimal place is filled with a 0. Up to and including October 2023 all values
calculated and published with two decimal places
https://www.emmi-benchmarks.eu/terms-of-use
https://www.emmi-benchmarks.eu/benchmarks/euribor/

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
44•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
a) Outstanding amounts o
Households' deposits Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2023 Nov. 2.88 315,984 1.01 233,972 3.43 193,442 1.39 21,232
Dec. 2.96 338,959 1.04 237,917 3.47 190,801 1.43 21,697
2024 Jan. 3.01 364,579 1.06 240,513 3.51 204,092 1.46 21,689
Feb. 3.04 385,969 1.08 241,610 3.54 205,657 1.48 20,732
Mar. 3.06 400,182 1.09 242,659 3.56 212,882 1.56 20,688
Apr. 3.08 414,278 1.11 243,548 3.54 213,659 1.62 20,719
May 3.09 424,087 1.12 244,423 3.50 211,340 1.75 20,827
June 3.09 433,321 1.13 244,777 3.42 200,180 1.84 21,079
July 3.09 441,266 1.14 245,316 3.44 203,485 1.91 21,085
Aug. 3.07 445,355 1.14 246,009 3.40 209,286 1.96 21,125
Sep. 3.03 451,326 1.15 246,598 3.28 210,020 2.01 21,852
Oct. 2.95 453,875 1.16 248,069 3.14 216,899 2.04 21,601
Nov. 2.81 450,257 1.16 248,463 2.97 210,815 2.08 21,274
Housing loans to households  3 Loans to households for consumption and other purposes  4,5
with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2023 Nov. 5.70 3,294 3.58 24,792 1.89 1,556,410 9.99 46,653 4.74 76,885 4.09 328,941
Dec. 5.62 3,198 3.64 24,499 1.90 1,556,523 10.01 47,390 4.81 77,044 4.13 326,980
2024 Jan. 5.66 3,354 3.69 24,060 1.91 1,554,763 10.16 46,574 4.89 76,552 4.18 327,358
Feb. 5.70 3,250 3.72 23,819 1.92 1,555,595 10.18 46,259 4.97 76,486 4.22 327,721
Mar. 5.68 3,184 3.75 23,540 1.93 1,558,297 10.05 47,109 4.90 76,985 4.26 326,829
Apr. 5.65 3,289 3.78 23,271 1.94 1,559,197 10.13 45,949 4.97 76,906 4.30 327,227
May 5.55 3,400 3.81 23,042 1.95 1,561,200 10.13 46,181 5.13 77,092 4.34 327,336
June 5.58 3,272 3.84 22,914 1.97 1,564,022 10.17 46,114 5.22 76,708 4.37 326,248
July 5.45 3,483 3.87 22,626 1.98 1,566,908 10.00 45,875 5.27 76,941 4.40 326,337
Aug. 5.43 3,344 3.90 22,463 2.00 1,570,363 9.97 45,873 5.30 77,210 4.43 326,755
Sep. 5.38 3,308 3.91 22,308 2.01 1,572,823 10.06 47,862 5.34 77,109 4.47 325,545
Oct. 5.19 3,325 3.94 22,206 2.02 1,574,221 9.86 46,477 5.37 77,277 4.47 327,532
Nov. 5.15 3,189 3.99 22,050 2.04 1,577,905 9.76 45,342 5.41 77,501 4.50 327,919
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2023 Nov. 5.97 187,977 4.45 253,976 2.48 892,391
Dec. 6.05 180,730 4.50 255,561 2.51 891,507
2024 Jan. 6.06 183,005 4.53 255,411 2.52 893,128
Feb. 6.00 184,401 4.64 253,221 2.55 896,388
Mar. 6.03 189,482 4.62 249,544 2.56 895,185
Apr. 5.97 188,827 4.72 248,341 2.58 897,166
May 5.92 188,826 4.74 249,224 2.59 899,489
June 5.88 192,015 4.74 248,588 2.59 896,461
July 5.91 189,012 4.73 249,072 2.60 898,488
Aug. 5.88 186,347 4.71 249,434 2.62 901,170
Sep. 5.75 189,368 4.68 249,435 2.62 897,212
Oct. 5.59 185,531 4.59 249,770 2.61 898,316
Nov. 5.47 186,361 4.59 248,694 2.63 904,092
* The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate
statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the related volumes of
euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non-financial corporations
domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises individuals (including sole
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations
include all enterprises other than insurance corporations, banks and other financial
institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional.
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the
Bundesbank’s website (Statistics/Money and capital markets/Interest rates and
yields/Interest rates on deposits and loans).  o The statistics on outstanding amounts are
collected at the end of the month.  1 The effective interest rates are calculated either asannualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation
methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related
charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents,
guarantees and credit insurance.  2 Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics.
3 Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home
improvements; including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim
credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name
and for their own account.  4 Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for
the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services.  5 For the
purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as
business, debt consolidation, education, etc.  6 Including overdrafts (see also footnotes
12 to 14 on p. 47 ).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
45•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Households' deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice  8 of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2023 Nov. 0.59 1,726,394 3.46 57,743 3.40 6,243 3.18 4,292 0.67 400,980 2.09 48,268
Dec. 0.60 1,731,513 3.37 49,974 3.25 4,896 3.17 4,389 0.69 396,006 2.17 50,818
2024 Jan. 0.62 1,702,116 3.27 56,368 3.13 5,846 2.80 3,300 0.71 386,987 2.25 53,387
Feb. 0.58 1,698,248 3.28 55,090 3.04 5,651 2.65 2,339 0.72 379,659 2.30 55,755
Mar. 0.60 1,698,313 3.27 47,316 2.94 3,332 2.53 2,296 0.74 373,900 2.35 57,421
Apr. 0.60 1,698,724 3.21 52,193 2.95 3,789 2.76 2,954 0.75 368,393 2.38 58,350
May 0.60 1,701,051 3.22 50,351 2.91 3,284 2.43 1,947 0.76 364,344 2.41 58,880
June 0.59 1,706,912 3.11 47,821 2.90 3,156 2.51 1,930 0.76 359,875 2.43 59,236
July 0.58 1,702,120 3.10 52,304 2.82 3,175 2.46 2,188 0.76 355,745 2.44 59,365
Aug. 0.58 1,738,837 3.04 54,951 2.74 3,013 2.31 1,824 0.77 352,793 2.44 59,448
Sep. 0.57 1,732,207 2.92 53,747 2.60 2,726 2.35 1,531 0.76 350,119 2.42 60,261
Oct. 0.56 1,739,552 2.76 52,529 2.51 3,955 2.22 1,881 0.73 347,649 2.39 61,015
Nov. 0.54 1,774,989 2.64 54,468 2.49 4,500 2.21 1,664 0.72 345,853 2.33 60,341
Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2023 Nov. 1.02 556,270 3.73 99,933 3.71 820 3.30 418
Dec. 1.02 553,882 3.71 92,454 3.47 855 2.98 343
2024 Jan. 1.05 535,302 3.71 91,219 3.20 419 2.81 401
Feb. 1.03 524,848 3.70 94,014 3.16 527 2.90 239
Mar. 1.00 525,597 3.74 109,409 3.29 609 3.60 538
Apr. 1.01 527,442 3.74 109,540 3.46 815 3.68 573
May 1.06 535,774 3.71 99,982 3.58 1,720 3.63 1,543
June 1.00 530,169 3.56 104,386 3.46 1,187 3.60 1,248
July 1.02 544,474 3.51 102,515 3.51 1,347 3.46 842
Aug. 1.09 547,151 3.45 94,979 2.86 357 3.30 1,078
Sep. 1.07 553,465 3.34 116,890 2.99 813 3.35 648
Oct. 0.98 557,777 3.14 119,676 2.66 686 3.16 512
Nov. 1.01 565,293 2.91 109,097 2.66 387 2.66 472
Loans to households
Loans for consumption  4 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2023 Nov. 8.72 8.55 8,130 9.70 1,626 8.45 329 7.29 2,863 9.29 4,938
Dec. 8.69 8.25 6,106 9.28 905 7.99 298 7.22 2,491 9.04 3,317
2024 Jan. 8.73 8.49 8,062 9.55 1,563 7.86 261 7.30 2,718 9.16 5,082
Feb. 8.56 8.34 8,245 9.24 1,308 7.86 262 7.24 2,909 8.99 5,073
Mar. 8.27 8.03 8,190 9.21 1,250 8.15 260 6.87 3,173 8.79 4,757
Apr. 8.34 8.07 9,080 9.32 1,348 7.46 320 6.91 3,581 8.91 5,180
May 8.46 8.16 8,491 9.36 1,229 7.04 328 7.09 3,330 8.97 4,833
June 8.29 8.03 8,426 9.19 1,234 6.76 304 6.95 3,359 8.86 4,763
July 8.33 8.10 9,917 9.31 1,497 7.03 331 6.90 3,914 8.98 5,672
Aug. 8.42 8.06 8,287 9.24 1,329 6.99 315 6.87 3,069 8.87 4,902
Sep. 8.45 8.11 7,641 9.07 1,196 7.18 287 6.96 2,745 8.85 4,610
Oct. 8.46 8.08 7,760 9.08 1,239 7.02 293 6.77 2,758 8.90 4,709
Nov. 8.49 8.07 7,472 8.79 1,094 6.15 342 6.79 2,653 8.98 4,477
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnote x see p. 47●. + For deposits with
an agreed maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card
debt: new business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial
corporations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted
average rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. For
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts,
credit card debt: new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for
the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending business atthe end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average rates of
interest.  7 Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form the
underlying total using a grossing-up procedure.  8 Including non-financial corporations’
deposits; including fidelity and growth premiums.  9 Excluding overdrafts.  10 Annual
percentage rate of charge, which contains other related charges which may occur for
enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit
insurance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
46•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd)
Loans to households for other purposes  5 with an initial rate fixation of
Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Loans to households 
2023 Nov. 5.43 3,152 5.13 765 5.90 1,345 5.53 764 4.76 1,043
Dec. 5.20 4,287 5.21 988 5.77 1,719 5.12 1,234 4.54 1,334
2024 Jan. 5.23 3,673 5.02 1,102 5.78 1,717 5.26 823 4.38 1,133
Feb. 5.13 2,997 5.13 703 5.73 1,237 5.24 675 4.36 1,085
Mar. 4.91 3,987 5.08 953 5.68 1,522 5.16 814 4.07 1,651
Apr. 5.05 3,544 4.99 1,093 5.67 1,314 5.26 891 4.30 1,339
May 4.99 3,199 5.00 881 5.48 1,288 5.19 749 4.32 1,162
June 4.98 3,711 5.01 860 5.55 1,479 5.23 838 4.23 1,394
July 4.82 4,100 4.73 1,191 5.32 1,636 5.24 744 4.16 1,720
Aug. 4.82 3,109 4.91 778 5.49 1,063 5.22 621 4.15 1,425
Sep. 4.65 3,804 4.76 1,024 5.24 1,504 4.81 696 4.02 1,604
Oct. 4.37 4,543 4.47 1,226 4.86 1,598 4.44 1,073 3.91 1,872
Nov. 4.37 3,925 4.38 900 4.91 1,283 4.65 726 3.91 1,916
    of which: Loans to sole proprietors
2023 Nov. 5.52 2,249 . . 6.06 900 5.60 587 4.82 762
Dec. 5.42 2,861 . . 5.93 1,256 5.58 660 4.63 945
2024 Jan. 5.33 2,814 . . 5.88 1,335 5.34 656 4.42 823
Feb. 5.22 2,274 . . 5.82 908 5.40 573 4.40 793
Mar. 4.96 3,188 . . 5.75 1,215 5.25 700 4.05 1,273
Apr. 5.08 2,756 . . 5.70 962 5.39 760 4.27 1,034
May 5.09 2,320 . . 5.57 859 5.34 643 4.38 818
June 5.08 2,844 . . 5.67 1,109 5.35 683 4.29 1,052
July 4.90 3,158 . . 5.36 1,261 5.39 625 4.20 1,272
Aug. 4.88 2,317 . . 5.53 758 5.33 532 4.16 1,027
Sep. 4.74 2,827 . . 5.28 1,122 5.09 517 4.07 1,188
Oct. 4.44 3,430 . . 4.93 1,226 4.77 785 3.83 1,419
Nov. 4.39 3,002 . . 5.04 942 4.72 592 3.84 1,468
Loans to households (cont'd)
Housing loans  3 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 yearsover 5 year and
up to 10 years over 10 years
Erhebungs-
zeitraumAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2023 Nov. 4.27 4.22 13,473 4.56 2,236 5.62 1,723 4.61 1,588 3.92 4,936 3.92 5,225
Dec. 4.12 4.05 12,151 4.32 2,055 5.56 1,576 4.44 1,553 3.80 4,349 3.65 4,672
2024 Jan. 3.90 3.85 14,667 4.10 2,844 5.44 1,862 4.08 1,584 3.56 5,397 3.55 5,825
Feb. 3.92 3.88 14,245 4.30 2,429 5.41 1,783 4.04 1,612 3.59 5,153 3.61 5,697
Mar. 3.88 3.83 15,439 4.01 2,258 5.28 1,739 4.09 1,755 3.55 5,414 3.61 6,530
Apr. 3.91 3.86 16,793 4.21 2,754 5.45 1,869 4.06 1,868 3.57 6,234 3.64 6,822
May 3.96 3.91 15,403 4.19 2,277 5.44 1,828 4.14 1,480 3.60 6,051 3.69 6,044
June 3.99 3.95 16,296 4.33 2,186 5.51 2,039 4.19 1,476 3.66 6,163 3.68 6,618
July 3.97 3.92 19,511 4.22 3,156 5.38 2,340 4.15 1,839 3.64 7,547 3.71 7,786
Aug. 3.87 3.83 16,811 4.14 2,526 5.37 1,816 4.01 1,658 3.60 6,122 3.60 7,216
Sep. 3.78 3.73 16,611 4.01 2,594 5.29 1,898 3.88 1,581 3.47 5,987 3.50 7,146
Oct. 3.69 3.65 17,878 3.89 3,123 4.99 1,991 3.81 1,802 3.42 6,232 3.45 7,853
Nov. 3.65 3.59 17,721 3.95 2,794 5.02 1,984 3.69 1,720 3.36 5,062 3.39 8,956
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2023 Nov. . 4.02 6,174 . . 5.50 669 4.45 728 3.80 2,170 3.70 2,607
Dec. . 3.86 5,588 . . 5.39 612 4.29 609 3.73 1,935 3.47 2,432
2024 Jan. . 3.69 7,051 . . 5.34 706 3.96 746 3.44 2,461 3.45 3,138
Feb. . 3.70 6,827 . . 5.33 717 3.82 764 3.43 2,314 3.50 3,032
Mar. . 3.66 7,324 . . 5.00 737 3.91 762 3.43 2,491 3.49 3,334
Apr. . 3.74 7,898 . . 5.48 783 3.88 853 3.48 2,770 3.53 3,492
May . 3.77 6,873 . . 5.35 740 3.97 677 3.48 2,483 3.57 2,973
June . 3.78 7,745 . . 5.43 844 4.03 682 3.54 2,777 3.52 3,442
July . 3.77 8,861 . . 5.27 877 3.97 808 3.55 3,290 3.59 3,886
Aug. . 3.69 7,548 . . 5.29 745 3.85 710 3.51 2,614 3.45 3,479
Sep. . 3.57 7,608 . . 5.10 746 3.70 687 3.38 2,689 3.37 3,486
Oct. . 3.50 8,012 . . 4.79 843 3.56 787 3.32 2,635 3.32 3,747
Nov. . 3.41 7,880 . . 4.89 770 3.48 791 3.29 2,224 3.18 4,095
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
footnote 11, see p. 47●.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
47•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which: of which:
Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13Extended
credit card debtRevolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2023 Nov. 10.80 38,416 10.95 26,932 18.18 6,614 6.41 95,688 6.44 95,191
Dec. 10.76 39,266 11.03 27,422 18.17 6,609 6.49 92,617 6.52 92,164
2024 Jan. 11.03 38,673 11.19 27,497 18.22 6,534 6.48 93,839 6.51 93,367
Feb. 11.06 38,233 11.22 27,163 18.29 6,460 6.47 95,704 6.50 95,225
Mar. 10.88 39,566 11.17 27,767 18.66 6,459 6.48 97,035 6.51 96,538
Apr. 11.00 38,415 11.19 27,036 18.65 6,438 6.37 96,481 6.40 95,979
May 10.95 38,754 11.23 27,112 18.66 6,427 6.38 96,257 6.41 95,778
June 10.96 38,787 11.09 27,550 18.67 6,425 6.32 98,856 6.35 98,366
July 10.76 38,598 11.05 26,764 18.61 6,442 6.34 96,983 6.37 96,494
Aug. 10.76 38,728 11.06 26,783 18.60 6,487 6.36 96,173 6.39 95,725
Sep. 10.95 40,475 11.10 28,680 18.66 6,695 6.27 97,568 6.30 97,065
Oct. 10.75 38,998 10.91 27,202 18.29 6,714 6.10 94,754 6.13 94,271
Nov. 10.69 37,776 10.75 26,132 18.26 6,731 6.00 95,914 6.04 95,415
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which: Loans up to €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of Loans over €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of
TotalRenegotiated
loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 yearsfloating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2023 Nov. 5.17 79,316 5.28 22,467 6.27 10,430 6.87 1,838 4.50 936 5.07 56,524 4.66 3,644 4.10 5,944
Dec. 5.19 108,487 5.34 31,589 6.07 11,245 6.60 2,020 4.33 1,115 5.28 76,500 4.63 7,141 3.79 10,466
2024 Jan. 5.16 75,818 5.37 22,554 5.81 10,279 6.48 1,856 4.21 932 5.18 54,103 4.51 3,830 3.64 4,818
Feb. 5.06 72,892 5.36 18,973 5.77 10,256 6.77 1,809 4.19 879 5.19 49,631 3.29 6,114 3.85 4,203
Mar. 5.19 94,238 5.42 27,803 5.64 12,574 6.70 1,930 4.24 1,017 5.27 67,328 4.29 5,644 3.79 5,745
Apr. 5.20 79,786 5.35 23,180 5.67 9,851 6.60 3,249 4.20 1,118 5.24 56,030 4.40 4,605 3.84 4,933
May 5.10 82,546 5.27 20,970 5.67 10,468 6.62 3,568 4.24 961 5.13 57,369 4.12 4,985 3.69 5,195
June 5.06 101,220 5.11 31,097 5.59 11,582 6.58 4,052 4.26 984 5.07 71,086 4.49 6,869 3.75 6,647
July 4.98 83,558 5.12 23,367 5.57 10,470 6.50 3,672 4.22 1,236 5.03 55,383 4.14 5,738 3.73 7,059
Aug. 5.02 75,678 4.98 19,585 5.48 9,906 6.52 2,515 3.98 1,115 5.10 52,170 3.95 4,129 3.76 5,843
Sep. 4.68 102,848 4.88 25,662 5.28 11,734 6.44 3,423 3.93 1,083 4.65 73,859 4.21 5,256 3.63 7,493
Oct. 4.68 95,792 4.82 24,634 5.12 12,241 6.23 3,587 3.89 1,042 4.68 67,518 4.16 4,689 3.60 6,715
Nov. 4.45 79,102 4.62 20,567 4.98 12,259 6.31 3,309 3.78 1,083 4.44 50,355 3.73 5,052 3.33 7,044
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2023 Nov. 4.69 10,586 . . 5.73 353 4.83 107 3.88 250 4.90 7,211 4.51 1,045 3.74 1,620
Dec. 4.83 15,673 . . 5.55 459 5.01 139 3.82 291 5.22 10,040 4.81 1,915 3.45 2,829
2024 Jan. 4.78 8,277 . . 5.69 446 4.64 150 3.68 250 5.04 5,880 4.09 707 3.41 844
Feb. 4.87 7,393 . . 5.68 351 4.70 113 3.60 231 5.16 5,054 4.55 846 3.45 798
Mar. 5.03 11,566 . . 5.74 412 4.91 99 3.75 277 5.24 8,292 5.35 1,271 3.39 1,215
Apr. 4.81 8,922 . . 5.61 457 4.90 159 3.69 272 4.93 5,989 5.13 1,001 3.77 1,044
May 4.79 8,862 . . 5.64 356 4.62 151 3.76 247 5.13 5,522 4.71 1,249 3.46 1,337
June 4.97 12,576 . . 5.61 392 4.68 173 3.55 251 5.34 7,255 4.86 2,681 3.73 1,824
July 4.63 10,570 . . 5.44 482 4.88 162 3.81 305 5.06 6,631 3.88 1,646 3.27 1,344
Aug. 4.61 8,058 . . 5.40 360 4.51 161 3.60 285 5.03 4,614 4.64 1,033 3.37 1,605
Sep. 4.59 11,171 . . 5.31 401 4.47 140 3.55 328 4.97 6,840 4.41 1,356 3.50 2,106
Oct. 4.63 19,382 . . 5.04 472 4.03 179 3.41 282 4.79 15,034 5.02 1,453 3.31 1,962
Nov. 4.09 9,335 . . 5.00 381 4.21 149 3.21 295 4.50 5,321 4.10 1,386 2.79 1,803
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
11 For the purposes of the interest rate statistics, a loan is considered to be secured if
collateral (amongst others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at
least the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned.
12 Including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower
may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior
notice to the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as
funds are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no
obligation of regular repayment of funds.  13 Overdrafts are defined as debit balanceson current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are
within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank.  14 Including
convenience and extended credit card debt. Convenience credit is defined as the credit
granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period between payment transactions effected
with the card during one billing cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this
specific billing cycle become due.  15 The amount category refers to the single loan
transaction considered as new business.  x Dominated by the business of one or two
banks. Therefore, the value cannot be published due to confidentiality.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
48•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets
€ billion
End of
year/quarter TotalCurrency
and
deposits  1Debt
securities Loans  2Shares and
other equityInvestment
fund
shares/unitsFinancial
derivativesTechnical
reserves  3Non-financial
assetsRemaining
assets
Insurance corporations 
2021 Q3 2,653.1 271.7 474.2 358.2 463.4 899.8 3.3 87.8 38.3 56.3
Q4 2,667.2 261.3 468.6 355.1 472.4 921.6 3.2 85.0 40.8 59.3
2022 Q1 2,547.3 243.7 440.2 333.2 468.7 870.5 2.7 87.5 41.0 59.8
Q2 2,369.8 215.6 390.4 305.5 462.5 803.5 3.0 85.5 41.3 62.6
Q3 2,296.3 202.1 369.9 289.1 461.3 776.7 4.0 84.3 41.4 67.6
Q4 2,275.6 189.7 373.8 279.7 466.0 772.1 3.4 79.9 38.7 72.2
2023 Q1 2,326.7 201.6 380.7 280.4 472.6 790.1 3.6 85.0 38.5 74.3
Q2 2,331.8 194.8 383.4 280.4 475.6 799.2 3.6 83.9 38.1 72.9
Q3 2,311.1 186.5 376.7 274.2 483.4 785.3 3.7 88.6 38.1 74.7
Q4 2,408.5 190.2 405.6 291.0 499.7 822.6 3.3 79.0 34.2 83.0
2024 Q1 2,477.6 193.7 412.6 289.4 502.9 847.6 3.7 97.0 35.1 95.5
Q2 2,435.8 183.9 410.0 287.7 481.9 847.4 3.1 95.9 35.0 91.0
Q3 2,486.2 184.1 431.8 291.0 491.8 870.5 2.9 96.6 34.9 82.8
    Life insurance
2021 Q3 1,400.1 159.2 233.8 214.8 87.7 654.6 1.9 13.4 20.8 13.8
Q4 1,411.1 152.4 231.9 211.8 93.4 669.1 1.7 14.6 21.9 14.3
2022 Q1 1,317.8 136.8 211.5 193.1 99.7 626.1 0.9 13.9 22.0 13.8
Q2 1,202.1 120.5 180.3 173.1 104.2 569.4 0.9 13.6 22.1 17.9
Q3 1,149.6 110.2 166.6 162.1 107.0 546.4 1.1 12.3 22.3 21.7
Q4 1,130.1 103.6 170.5 155.6 111.5 540.0 1.1 11.5 19.5 16.8
2023 Q1 1,147.9 105.1 170.3 155.6 113.3 553.5 1.0 12.1 19.4 17.4
Q2 1,154.0 102.9 171.7 154.9 114.3 559.9 1.0 12.0 19.2 18.0
Q3 1,123.5 97.9 163.2 149.4 115.7 547.2 1.5 11.7 19.1 17.9
Q4 1,180.4 101.5 178.7 161.0 116.6 574.7 1.4 10.3 16.6 19.5
2024 Q1 1,193.5 98.6 176.5 156.0 115.6 594.3 1.4 10.2 16.6 24.3
Q2 1,180.6 95.3 172.6 153.6 115.1 594.3 1.2 7.2 16.5 24.7
Q3 1,206.4 96.1 181.7 159.0 116.3 609.6 1.2 7.2 16.5 18.8
    Non-life insurance
2021 Q3 733.1 98.7 141.0 83.8 93.7 228.4 0.4 46.4 12.8 27.7
Q4 738.4 94.6 140.1 84.7 97.5 234.3 0.3 44.6 14.0 28.4
2022 Q1 722.5 91.5 133.4 80.8 98.6 227.7 0.2 45.7 13.9 30.7
Q2 681.7 81.9 122.0 74.9 98.6 216.5 0.1 44.1 14.1 29.5
Q3 661.2 76.2 116.1 70.3 99.2 212.3 0.1 43.2 14.1 29.7
Q4 659.9 72.9 115.3 69.0 100.0 215.5 0.2 42.8 14.2 30.1
2023 Q1 687.1 81.2 121.1 69.7 103.0 219.5 0.1 45.1 14.2 33.2
Q2 688.3 77.2 124.0 70.7 104.4 222.0 0.1 44.9 14.1 30.9
Q3 682.7 73.7 122.7 69.2 107.0 221.0 0.1 45.3 14.3 29.4
Q4 708.1 74.9 131.9 74.1 109.0 230.1 0.1 43.9 13.0 31.1
2024 Q1 748.8 81.0 139.5 75.3 110.6 234.6 0.1 55.8 13.9 38.0
Q2 742.2 75.4 140.9 75.1 110.7 233.9 0.1 56.8 13.9 35.4
Q3 754.7 75.0 146.4 77.4 111.5 240.9 0.2 57.7 13.9 31.7
    Reinsurance 4
2021 Q3 519.9 13.9 99.3 59.6 282.0 16.7 1.0 28.0 4.7 14.8
Q4 517.7 14.3 96.6 58.6 281.4 18.2 1.1 25.9 4.9 16.7
2022 Q1 507.1 15.5 95.3 59.3 270.4 16.7 1.6 27.9 5.0 15.3
Q2 486.0 13.2 88.0 57.5 259.6 17.6 1.9 27.9 5.1 15.1
Q3 485.5 15.6 87.3 56.7 255.1 18.1 2.7 28.8 5.1 16.2
Q4 485.6 13.2 88.0 55.1 254.5 16.7 2.1 25.7 5.0 25.3
2023 Q1 491.8 15.3 89.2 55.1 256.3 17.1 2.4 27.8 4.8 23.7
Q2 489.5 14.7 87.6 54.8 256.9 17.2 2.5 26.9 4.8 24.0
Q3 504.9 14.8 90.8 55.6 260.7 17.1 2.1 31.6 4.8 27.3
Q4 520.0 13.7 95.0 55.9 274.1 17.8 1.8 24.7 4.6 32.4
2024 Q1 535.3 14.2 96.6 58.1 276.6 18.7 2.2 31.0 4.6 33.2
Q2 513.0 13.2 96.5 59.1 256.0 19.1 1.8 31.9 4.5 30.8
Q3 525.1 13.0 103.6 54.5 264.0 19.9 1.6 31.7 4.5 32.2
Pension funds 5
2021 Q3 689.8 82.9 60.4 48.9 11.8 453.6 0.1 12.2 17.8 2.2
Q4 709.9 82.1 60.0 48.7 11.3 473.5 0.1 12.4 18.5 3.3
2022 Q1 689.8 75.8 56.7 46.2 12.0 465.9 0.0 12.4 18.5 2.2
Q2 665.9 70.3 52.9 43.3 12.5 453.5 0.0 12.3 18.6 2.5
Q3 657.0 67.7 52.0 42.1 12.9 448.1 0.0 12.9 18.7 2.6
Q4 664.0 67.3 54.6 41.9 13.6 451.3 0.0 13.1 18.8 3.5
2023 Q1 671.5 66.4 56.9 42.3 13.6 457.9 0.0 12.9 18.7 2.7
Q2 678.7 67.5 58.9 42.7 13.4 462.0 0.0 12.9 18.7 2.6
Q3 675.9 67.1 60.3 42.3 13.5 458.2 0.1 12.9 18.7 2.8
Q4 703.5 70.1 67.7 44.0 13.5 472.6 0.1 13.2 18.9 3.4
2024 Q1 712.3 70.4 69.6 44.1 13.7 480.8 0.1 12.4 18.6 2.6
Q2 714.8 71.0 71.4 44.3 13.7 480.6 0.0 12.1 19.1 2.5
Q3 730.4 73.0 75.0 44.9 14.3 489.6 0.1 12.0 19.2 2.3
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections.  1 Accounts receivable to monetary financial institutions, including
registered bonds, borrower's note loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including
deposits retained on assumed reinsurance as well as registered bonds, borrower's note
loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  3 Including reinsurance recoverables and claims ofpension funds on pension managers.  4 Not including the reinsurance business
conducted by primary insurers, which is included there.  5 The term "pension funds"
refers to the institutional sector "pension funds" of the European System of Accounts.
Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational pension
schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
49•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
2. Liabilities
€ billion
Technical reserves
End of
year/quarter TotalDebt
securities
issued Loans  1Shares and
other equity Total  2Life/
pension
entitlements  3 Non-lifeFinancial
derivativesRemaining
liabilities Net worth  6
Insurance corporations
2021 Q3 2,653.1 35.4 82.8 567.0 1,817.7 1,569.1 248.7 2.5 147.6 –
Q4 2,667.2 36.0 82.0 579.3 1,820.7 1,578.3 242.3 2.5 146.8 –
2022 Q1 2,547.3 34.4 82.1 563.2 1,725.9 1,472.6 253.3 4.0 137.7 –
Q2 2,369.8 33.6 78.7 541.7 1,574.4 1,326.8 247.6 6.0 135.3 –
Q3 2,296.3 33.8 73.6 537.5 1,506.1 1,262.3 243.7 7.4 138.0 –
Q4 2,275.6 32.3 70.1 544.0 1,487.0 1,248.7 238.3 5.6 136.7 –
2023 Q1 2,326.7 33.1 71.2 544.7 1,539.0 1,277.3 261.7 4.3 134.3 –
Q2 2,331.8 33.1 68.4 548.0 1,544.4 1,284.6 259.8 4.4 133.5 –
Q3 2,311.1 35.3 76.9 552.1 1,508.1 1,248.1 260.1 4.6 134.1 –
Q4 2,408.5 30.5 73.3 569.8 1,586.6 1,325.4 261.2 4.1 144.1 –
2024 Q1 2,477.6 30.6 78.1 575.0 1,642.5 1,345.5 296.9 3.7 147.8 –
Q2 2,435.8 32.2 76.8 510.2 1,684.6 1,387.1 297.5 3.6 128.4 –
Q3 2,486.2 33.4 79.5 519.7 1,725.1 1,424.2 300.9 3.5 124.9 –
    Life insurance
2021 Q3 1,400.1 3.3 19.3 148.1 1,176.4 1,176.4 – 1.1 51.9 –
Q4 1,411.1 3.3 20.7 148.2 1,185.5 1,185.5 – 0.9 52.5 –
2022 Q1 1,317.8 3.2 19.9 142.9 1,101.6 1,101.6 – 1.4 48.8 –
Q2 1,202.1 3.1 19.0 141.4 984.5 984.5 – 2.7 51.3 –
Q3 1,149.6 3.0 17.0 138.0 936.9 936.9 – 3.1 51.8 –
Q4 1,130.1 2.7 16.6 136.0 924.9 924.9 – 2.3 47.7 –
2023 Q1 1,147.9 2.7 17.8 132.9 946.0 946.0 – 1.9 46.6 –
Q2 1,154.0 2.7 17.6 133.6 951.7 951.7 – 1.7 46.8 –
Q3 1,123.5 2.7 16.9 134.1 919.9 919.9 – 2.4 47.6 –
Q4 1,180.4 0.8 17.7 133.3 977.7 977.7 – 2.0 48.8 –
2024 Q1 1,193.5 0.8 17.5 128.8 994.3 994.3 – 1.7 50.2 –
Q2 1,180.6 1.0 14.5 92.9 1,035.1 1,035.1 – 1.9 35.2 –
Q3 1,206.4 0.6 14.8 94.3 1,063.8 1,063.8 – 1.7 31.3 –
    Non-life insurance
2021 Q3 733.1 1.2 10.5 168.9 498.7 367.8 130.9 0.2 53.7 –
Q4 738.4 1.4 10.7 175.8 492.6 367.6 125.0 0.2 57.8 –
2022 Q1 722.5 1.3 11.7 173.1 483.0 347.1 136.0 0.3 53.0 –
Q2 681.7 1.2 11.1 167.7 451.9 322.7 129.2 0.5 49.3 –
Q3 661.2 1.2 10.5 168.0 430.5 307.4 123.1 0.5 50.5 –
Q4 659.9 1.2 10.4 170.4 425.6 306.7 118.9 0.4 52.0 –
2023 Q1 687.1 1.2 10.7 173.0 450.8 314.4 136.4 0.4 51.0 –
Q2 688.3 1.2 10.6 176.0 451.1 317.1 134.0 0.3 49.1 –
Q3 682.7 1.7 10.9 176.6 444.4 313.0 131.4 0.4 48.8 –
Q4 708.1 0.6 12.5 180.2 461.3 333.6 127.7 0.3 53.3 –
2024 Q1 748.8 0.6 13.4 184.6 494.5 337.1 157.4 0.3 55.5 –
Q2 742.2 0.7 13.4 181.1 493.6 338.4 155.2 0.3 53.2 –
Q3 754.7 1.2 12.8 182.6 505.9 351.1 154.8 0.3 52.0 –
    Reinsurance 4
2021 Q3 519.9 30.9 53.0 250.1 142.7 24.9 117.8 1.3 42.0 –
Q4 517.7 31.4 50.5 255.3 142.6 25.3 117.3 1.4 36.5 –
2022 Q1 507.1 30.0 50.4 247.2 141.3 23.9 117.4 2.3 35.9 –
Q2 486.0 29.3 48.6 232.6 138.0 19.6 118.4 2.8 34.7 –
Q3 485.5 29.7 46.2 231.5 138.7 18.0 120.7 3.8 35.7 –
Q4 485.6 28.4 43.1 237.5 136.5 17.1 119.4 2.9 37.1 –
2023 Q1 491.8 29.2 42.8 238.8 142.2 16.9 125.3 2.1 36.8 –
Q2 489.5 29.3 40.2 238.4 141.6 15.8 125.8 2.4 37.6 –
Q3 504.9 31.0 49.2 241.3 143.9 15.2 128.7 1.9 37.7 –
Q4 520.0 29.1 43.0 256.3 147.7 14.2 133.5 1.8 42.0 –
2024 Q1 535.3 29.1 47.2 261.6 153.7 14.1 139.6 1.7 42.0 –
Q2 513.0 30.5 48.9 236.2 155.9 13.6 142.3 1.4 40.0 –
Q3 525.1 31.6 51.9 242.8 155.4 9.3 146.1 1.6 41.7 –
Pension funds 5
2021 Q3 689.8 – 1.9 31.9 539.8 537.6 – 0.2 9.3 106.8
Q4 709.9 – 1.9 32.0 560.2 557.3 – 0.1 8.9 106.8
2022 Q1 689.8 – 2.0 33.5 559.7 556.9 – 0.1 9.5 85.1
Q2 665.9 – 1.8 33.5 561.0 558.4 – 0.1 9.0 60.4
Q3 657.0 – 1.9 34.7 563.1 560.6 – 0.1 9.7 47.5
Q4 664.0 – 1.8 34.5 576.4 573.9 – 0.1 9.4 41.8
2023 Q1 671.5 – 1.8 35.5 577.3 574.9 – 0.1 9.5 47.3
Q2 678.7 – 1.8 35.7 582.0 579.6 – 0.1 9.6 49.5
Q3 675.9 – 1.9 35.0 583.7 581.5 – 0.1 9.7 45.6
Q4 703.5 – 1.9 35.0 597.0 594.8 – 0.1 9.9 59.6
2024 Q1 712.3 – 1.9 36.0 600.0 597.8 – 0.1 9.6 64.8
Q2 714.8 – 1.9 36.0 601.3 599.1 – 0.1 9.9 65.7
Q3 730.4 – 1.8 36.3 606.1 603.9 – 0.1 9.9 76.1
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II and for pension funds on IORP supervisory data and own
data collections.  1 Including deposits retained on ceded business as well as registered
bonds, borrower's note loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including claims of pension
funds on pension managers and entitlements to non-pension benefits.  3 Technical
reserves "life" taking account of transitional measures. Health insurance is also includedin the "non-life insurance" sector.  4 Not including the reinsurance business conducted
by primary insurers, which is included there.  5 Valuation at book values. The term "pen-
sion funds" refers to the institutional sector "pension funds" of the European System of
Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational
pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included.  6 Own
funds correspond to the sum of "Net worth" and "Shares and other equity".

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
50•
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases TotalBank
debt
securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt
secur-
itiesForeign
debt
secur-
ities  3 Total  4Credit in-
stitutions
including
building
and loan
associations  5Deutsche
BundesbankOther
sectors  6Non-
residents  7
2015 15,219 –36,010 –65,778 26,762 3,006 51,229 99,225 – 66,330 121,164 44,391 – 84,006
2016 68,998 27,429 19,177 18,265 –10,012 41,569 161,776 – 58,012 187,500 32,288 – 92,778
2017 51,034 11,563 1,096 7,112 3,356 39,471 134,192 – 71,454 161,012 44,634 – 83,158
2018 78,657 16,630 33,251 12,433 –29,055 62,027 107,155 – 24,417 67,328 64,244 – 28,499
2019 139,611 68,536 29,254 32,505 6,778 71,075 60,195 8,059 2,408 49,728 79,416
2020 451,481 374,034 14,462 88,703 270,870 77,446 280,820 18,955 226,887 34,978 170,661
2021 230,854 221,648 31,941 19,754 169,953 9,205 243,497 – 41,852 245,198 40,150 – 12,643
2022 150,974 156,190 59,322 35,221 61,648 – 5,216 143,527 2,915 49,774 90,839 7,447
2023 280,393 158,228 88,018 –11,899 82,109 122,165 117,270 32,163 – 59,817 144,924 163,123
2023 Dec. – 23,373 –27,517 4,368 – 8,386 –23,499 4,144 – 11,188 – 7,024 – 5,130 966 – 12,185
2024 Jan. 30,652 25,509 8,437 6,301 10,771 5,143 6,259 17,106 – 7,128 – 3,718 24,392
Feb. 19,146 11,577 6,463 – 957 6,070 7,569 3,675 7,562 – 9,079 5,191 15,471
Mar. 42,591 15,188 13,915 3,072 – 1,799 27,402 19,477 16,349 – 4,776 7,905 23,113
Apr. – 27,913 –25,395 –10,665 6,215 –20,946 – 2,518 – 31,713 – 4,492 – 12,041 – 15,181 3,800
May 27,055 22,035 1,836 696 19,503 5,020 17,293 3,605 – 9,394 23,082 9,761
June 33,743 14,811 10,021 2,760 2,031 18,932 4,988 12,204 – 10,121 2,905 28,755
July 6,319 – 1,185 –17,832 – 1,018 17,665 7,504 – 5,484 1,835 – 5,220 – 2,099 11,803
Aug. 16,344 7,546 3,649 3,739 157 8,798 – 8,592 9,231 – 11,073 – 6,750 24,936
Sep. 26,194 6,564 9,543 – 1,018 – 1,962 19,630 7,871 16,898 – 7,504 – 1,524 18,324
Oct. 43,842 44,141 1,290 2,583 40,269 – 299 8,714 – 5,915 – 11,945 26,574 35,128
Nov. 15,866 13,327 – 7,628 2,072 18,882 2,540 – 11,740 7,339 – 1,731 – 17,347 27,606
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
purchasesDomestic
shares  8Foreign
shares  9 Total  10Credit insti-
tutions  5 Other sectors  11Non-
residents  12
2015 56,979 7,668 49,311 46,721 – 5,421 52,142 10,258
2016 39,133 4,409 34,724 39,265 – 5,143 44,408 – 132
2017 52,932 15,570 37,362 51,270 7,031 44,239 1,662
2018 61,400 16,188 45,212 89,624 – 11,184 100,808 – 28,224
2019 54,830 9,076 45,754 43,070 – 1,119 44,189 11,759
2020 78,464 17,771 60,693 111,570 27 111,543 – 33,106
2021 115,933 49,066 66,868 102,921 10,869 92,052 13,012
2022 – 6,275 27,792 – 34,066 2,997 – 8,262 11,259 – 9,272
2023 41,754 36,898 4,856 52,667 14,650 38,017 – 10,913
2023 Dec. 27,900 24,942 2,957 26,296 6,437 19,859 1,604
2024 Jan. 282 351 – 69 2,171 – 1,361 3,532 – 1,888
Feb. – 856 206 – 1,062 – 626 4,247 – 4,873 – 230
Mar. 7,233 4,679 2,554 9,297 6,657 2,640 – 2,064
Apr. 1,852 1,546 306 2,664 – 2,481 5,145 – 812
May 5,034 474 4,561 4,416 3,531 885 619
June – 1,682 292 – 1,974 – 2,637 – 4,084 1,447 955
July 3,120 204 2,916 4,180 40 4,140 – 1,060
Aug. – 2,381 1,300 – 3,681 – 2,832 – 3,201 369 450
Sep. 7,186 558 6,628 5,191 2,559 2,632 1,995
Oct. 6,547 6,195 352 7,794 3,813 3,981 – 1,247
Nov. – 3,010 863 – 3,874 – 2,243 – 3,466 1,223 – 767
1 Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers' portfolios of their own debt
securities.  2 Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction values.
4 Domestic and foreign debt securities.  5 Book values; statistically adjusted.  6 Residual;
also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.
Up to end-2008 including Deutsche Bundesbank.  7 Net purchases or net sales (-) of do-
mestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction values.  8 Excluding shares of publiclimited investment companies; at issue prices.  9 Net purchases or net sales (-) of foreign
shares (including direct investment) by residents; transaction values.  10 Domestic
and foreign shares.  11 Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign
securities by domestic mutual funds.  12 Net purchases or net sales (-) of domestic
shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The figures
for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
51•
VIII. Capital market
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities  1
Period Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by special-
purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt securities
Gross sales
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,675 400,701
3 2016 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,371 416,108
3 2017 1,047,822 619,199 30,339 8,933 438,463 141,466 66,290 362,332
2018 1,148,091 703,416 38,658 5,673 534,552 124,530 91,179 353,496
2019 1,285,541 783,977 38,984 9,587 607,900 127,504 94,367 407,197
6 2020 1,870,084 778,411 39,548 18,327 643,380 77,156 184,206 907,466
2021 1,658,004 795,271 41,866 17,293 648,996 87,116 139,775 722,958
2022 1,683,265 861,989 66,811 11,929 700,062 83,188 169,680 651,596
2023 1,705,524 937,757 45,073 12,633 782,969 97,082 153,128 614,639
2023 Dec. 81,025 55,000 1,834 1,453 46,549 5,164 4,722 21,302
2024 Jan. 151,286 89,021 6,405 1,630 70,605 10,380 14,833 47,433
Feb. 148,430 79,876 3,301 2,051 63,439 11,086 7,181 61,373
Mar. 124,684 62,659 5,081 608 45,393 11,577 11,709 50,316
Apr. 150,134 84,574 5,951 1,213 66,287 11,124 13,211 52,349
May 143,782 78,455 1,463 1,027 66,133 9,832 12,237 53,091
June 118,188 58,371 3,127 887 45,597 8,759 10,682 49,136
July 119,604 65,562 3,280 1,522 49,131 11,630 9,338 44,704
Aug. 113,940 60,353 2,571 413 46,104 11,265 6,501 47,086
Sep. 125,924 71,525 1,754 1,112 57,743 10,916 12,918 41,482
Oct. 121,438 57,431 2,679 2,036 39,390 13,326 11,523 52,484
Nov. 108,215 56,769 709 0 40,750 15,310 10,119 41,328
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years 4
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
3 2016 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
3 2017 357,506 170,357 22,395 6,447 94,852 46,663 44,891 142,257
2018 375,906 173,995 30,934 4,460 100,539 38,061 69,150 132,760
2019 396,617 174,390 26,832 6,541 96,673 44,346 69,682 152,544
6 2020 658,521 165,097 28,500 7,427 90,839 38,330 77,439 415,985
2021 486,335 171,799 30,767 6,336 97,816 36,880 64,234 250,303
2022 485,287 164,864 41,052 7,139 91,143 25,530 56,491 263,932
2023 482,193 155,790 28,294 4,664 101,059 21,772 44,272 282,132
2023 Dec. 14,764 6,401 1,040 1,205 2,551 1,605 763 7,600
2024 Jan. 55,105 23,961 5,330 537 14,875 3,219 8,244 22,900
Feb. 53,198 21,778 1,920 1,251 15,159 3,448 1,870 29,550
Mar. 44,606 12,428 4,590 606 4,928 2,304 6,478 25,700
Apr. 47,632 18,861 3,459 1,026 9,789 4,587 5,921 22,850
May 45,810 13,637 328 1,027 9,717 2,564 5,248 26,925
June 30,324 7,312 1,022 852 2,049 3,389 3,162 19,850
July 34,914 11,612 2,034 1,522 4,939 3,118 2,582 20,720
Aug. 36,346 9,667 2,421 413 4,993 1,841 2,559 24,120
Sep. 32,314 7,584 1,681 370 2,851 2,681 8,945 15,785
Oct. 45,420 12,031 1,939 1,528 5,769 2,794 6,464 26,925
Nov. 26,676 6,035 38 0 2,651 3,346 5,461 15,180
Net sales 5
2015 – 65,147 – 77,273 9,271 – 9,754 – 2,758 – 74,028 25,300 – 13,174
3 2016 21,951 10,792 2,176 – 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 – 7,020
3 2017 2,669 5,954 6,389 – 4,697 18,788 – 14,525 6,828 – 10,114
2018 2,758 26,648 19,814 – 6,564 18,850 – 5,453 9,738 – 33,630
2019 59,719 28,750 13,098 – 3,728 26,263 – 6,885 30,449 519
6 2020 473,795 28,147 8,661 8,816 22,067 – 11,398 49,536 396,113
2021 210,231 52,578 17,821 7,471 22,973 4,314 35,531 122,123
2022 135,853 36,883 23,894 – 9,399 15,944 6,444 30,671 68,299
2023 190,577 78,764 10,184 – 791 46,069 23,303 – 34 111,848
2023 Dec. – 11,217 10,301 308 1,288 9,314 – 609 – 4,873 – 16,644
2024 Jan. 4,841 4,209 – 569 1,400 – 2,865 6,243 4,372 – 3,740
Feb. 12,862 7,348 1,102 1,691 – 522 5,078 – 2,312 7,827
Mar. 17,943 13,538 1,459 – 498 8,865 3,713 3,784 620
Apr. – 9,914 – 10,653 2,897 – 1,562 – 14,334 2,346 4,972 – 4,233
May 5,787 2,720 – 2,643 77 2,782 2,505 3,598 – 532
June 15,859 9,951 – 486 – 207 9,726 918 2,329 3,578
July 415 – 18,041 – 1,491 480 – 19,593 2,563 – 4,490 22,947
Aug. 6,815 3,317 1,758 – 237 1,338 459 1,793 1,705
Sep. 11,706 7,980 – 4,138 442 11,086 589 2,965 762
Oct. 12,141 2,585 556 – 117 – 3,340 5,485 2,212 7,344
Nov. 20,257 – 4,724 – 526 – 514 – 6,635 2,951 2,184 22,798
* For definitions, see the explanatory notes in Statistical Series - Securities Issues
Statistics on pages 43 f.  1 Excluding registered bank debt securities.  2 Including
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Sectoral reclassification of
debt securities.  4 Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue.  5 Gross sales lessredemptions.  6 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year
2020 have been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions
are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
52•
VIII. Capital market
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities
End of year
or month/
Maturity
in years Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by
special-purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)Public
debt securities
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
1 2016 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
1 2017 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 651,211 320,432 2 302,543 1,617,244
2018 3,091,303 1,194,160 161,088 51,439 670,062 1 311,572 1 2 313,527 1,583,616
2019 2 3,149,373 1,222,911 174,188 47,712 696,325 304,686 2 342,325 1,584,136
4 2020 2 3,545,200 2 1,174,817 183,980 55,959 687,710 2 247,169 2 379,342 1,991,040
2021 3,781,975 1,250,777 202,385 63,496 731,068 253,828 414,791 2,116,406
2022 3,930,390 1,302,028 225,854 54,199 761,047 260,928 441,234 2,187,127
2023 4,131,592 1,384,958 237,099 54,312 806,808 286,739 441,742 2,304,892
2023 Dec. 4,131,592 1,384,958 237,099 54,312 806,808 286,739 441,742 2,304,892
2024 Jan. 4,140,092 1,394,649 236,671 55,735 808,508 293,736 446,559 2,298,884
Feb. 4,152,812 1,401,409 237,658 57,450 807,692 298,609 444,310 2,307,093
Mar. 4,173,121 1,415,363 239,096 56,960 816,963 302,344 448,012 2,309,746
Apr. 4,169,790 1,408,556 242,090 55,474 805,788 305,203 453,941 2,307,292
May 4,175,267 1,409,122 239,361 55,574 807,179 307,007 457,302 2,308,844
June 4,198,060 1,423,493 239,081 55,370 820,249 308,793 460,082 2,314,485
July 4,193,225 1,403,611 237,606 55,897 798,532 311,576 455,405 2,334,209
Aug. 4,195,648 1,403,950 239,400 55,662 796,741 312,147 457,309 2,334,389
Sep. 4,204,230 1,407,618 233,380 56,090 807,073 311,075 459,445 2,337,167
Oct. 4,227,651 1,419,276 235,844 56,012 808,324 319,096 462,217 2,346,158
Nov. 4,260,021 1,423,598 235,601 55,517 808,771 323,708 465,103 2,371,321
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity 3 Position at end-November 2024
up to under 2 1 245 540   527 587   71 483   15 847   312 760   127 497   89 399   628 554 
2 to under 4  865 694   360 021   70 676   16 603   200 617   72 124   85 237   420 436 
4 to under 6  626 341   212 375   40 846   7 971   122 328   41 230   75 615   338 350 
6 to under 8  374 829   130 288   23 116   4 041   74 592   28 539   48 190   196 351 
8 to under 10  344 400   91 953   19 292   8 022   47 184   17 455   25 287   227 160 
10 to under 15  243 884   55 507   8 087   2 824   34 964   9 631   27 626   160 752 
15 to under 20  127 525   11 068   1 338    81   7 390   2 260   16 815   99 641 
20 and above  431 809   34 799    764    128   8 936   24 972   96 934   300 076 
* Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers' portfolios.  1 Sectoral
reclassification of debt securities.  2 Adjustments due to the change in the country of
residence of the issuers or debt securities.  3 Calculated from month under review until
final maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of theresidual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc.
4 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year 2020 have
been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions are not
specially marked.
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies' capital due to
PeriodShare capital =
circulation at
end of period
under reviewNet increase or
net decrease (-)
during period
under reviewcash payments
and ex-
change of
convertible
bonds  1issue of
bonus sharescontribution
of claims
and other
real assetsmerger
and
transfer
of assetschange of
legal formreduction
of capital 
and
liquidationMemo item:
Share circulation
at market values
(market capita-
lisation)
level at end
of period
under review  2
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 – 1,394 – 1,385 – 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 – 1,062 3,272 319 337 – 953 – 2,165 – 1,865 1,676,397
2017 178,828 2,471 3,894 776 533 – 457 – 661 – 1,615 1,933,733
2018 180,187 1,357 3,670 716 82 – 1,055 – 1,111 – 946 1,634,155
3 4 2019 183,461 1,673 2,411 2,419 542 – 858 – 65 – 2,775 1,950,224
4 2020 181,881 – 2,872 1,877 219 178 – 2,051 – 460 – 2,635 1,963,588
2021 186,580 4,152 9,561 672 35 – 326 – 212 – 5,578 2,301,942
2022 199,789 12,272 14,950 224 371 – 29 – 293 – 2,952 1,858,963
2023 182,246 – 15,984 3,377 3 50 – 564 – 2,515 – 16,335 2,051,675
2023 Dec. 182,246 – 16,210 677 – – –– 2,366 – 14,521 2,051,675
2024 Jan. 182,103 – 144 42 – –– 0 – 115 – 71 2,061,708
Feb. 181,987 – 117 48 – –– 2 – 25 – 138 2,126,888
Mar. 182,100 113 344 – –– 7 – 5 – 218 2,213,065
Apr. 181,805 – 295 126 – –– 4 – 4 – 414 2,159,884
May 181,553 – 322 187 – – –– 328 – 180 2,159,986
June 181,236 – 317 31 8 0 – 9 – 73 – 274 2,135,158
July 181,104 – 143 117 20 –– 5 – 11 – 263 2,131,696
Aug. 181,117 7 316 – –– 76 – 55 – 177 2,162,378
Sep. 181,288 128 444 – –– 33 – 38 – 245 2,221,347
Oct. 181,470 179 565 – –– 5 – 3 – 377 2,175,920
Nov. 181,512 44 127 – –– 5 – 10 – 68 2,188,640
* Excluding shares of public limited investment companies.  1 Including shares issued
out of company profits.  2 All marketplaces. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on
data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mit teilungen and Deutsche BörseAG. 3 Methodological changes since October 2019.  4 Changes due to statistical
adjustments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
53•
VIII. Capital market
5. Yields on German securities
Issue yields Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1
Public debt securities Public debt securities Bank debt securities
Listed Federal securities
Total Totalof which:
Listed Federal
debt securitiesBank debt 
securities Total Total TotalWith a residual
maturity of
 9 to
10 years  2 TotalWith a residual
maturity of more
than 9 years and
up to 10 yearsCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)
Period % per annum
2015 0.7 0.4 0.4 0.7 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4
2016 0.4 0.1 – 0.1 0.6 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1
2017 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.6 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7
2018 0.7 0.6 0.4 0.6 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 1.0 2.5
2019 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.3 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 0.1 0.3 2.5
2020 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.5 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.0 0.1 1.7
2021 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.3 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.1 0.2 0.9
2022 1.6 1.3 1.2 1.9 1.5 1.2 1.1 1.1 1.9 1.9 3.3
2023 2.9 2.6 2.5 3.4 2.9 2.6 2.5 2.4 3.3 3.2 4.2
2023 Dec. 3.01 2.44 2.44 3.67 2.52 2.26 2.15 2.10 2.91 2.92 3.63
2024 Jan. 2.81 2.44 2.44 2.87 2.57 2.32 2.22 2.17 2.94 2.97 3.67
Feb. 2.71 2.47 2.47 3.05 2.72 2.48 2.39 2.33 3.09 3.10 3.74
Mar. 2.94 2.56 2.56 3.10 2.73 2.49 2.41 2.35 3.07 3.02 3.73
Apr. 3.05 2.61 2.61 3.12 2.81 2.58 2.50 2.45 3.15 3.14 3.74
May 3.08 2.70 2.70 3.18 2.88 2.66 2.58 2.52 3.19 3.20 3.84
June 2.92 2.64 2.64 3.31 2.86 2.63 2.55 2.48 3.17 3.26 3.87
July 2.88 2.55 2.55 3.08 2.80 2.58 2.50 2.46 3.09 3.24 3.74
Aug. 2.44 2.31 2.31 2.69 2.53 2.31 2.23 2.21 2.81 3.04 3.58
Sep. 2.75 2.24 2.24 2.88 2.46 2.25 2.17 2.17 2.71 2.98 3.53
Oct. 2.81 2.42 2.42 2.74 2.48 2.29 2.21 2.23 2.71 2.97 3.49
Nov. 2.96 2.21 2.21 2.94 2.53 2.34 2.26 2.31 2.72 2.92 3.52
1 Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of
over 4 years. Structured debt securities, debt securities with unscheduled redemption,
zero coupon bonds, floating rate notes and bonds not denominated in Euro are not
included. Group yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the
amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figuresare calculated on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual
figures are the unweighted means of the monthly figures. Adjustment of the scope of
securities included on 1 May 2020.  2 Only debt securities eligible as underlying
instruments for futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages.
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds  1 (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the
general publicCredit institutions
including building
and loan associations  2 Other sectors  3
of which:
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases Total TotalMoney
market
fundsSecur-
ities-
based
fundsReal
estate
fundsSpecial-
ised
fundsForeign
funds  4 Total Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
shares Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
sharesNon-resi-
dents  5
2015 189,802 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 43,665 181,932 7,362 494 174,570 43,171 7,870
2016 149,288 119,369 21,301 – 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 29,919 156,236 2,877 –3,172 153,359 33,091 –6,948
2017 148,214 94,921 29,560 – 235 21,970 4,406 65,361 53,292 150,740 4,938 1,048 145,802 52,244 –2,526
2018 108,293 103,694 15,279 377 4,166 6,168 88,415 4,599 114,973 2,979 –2,306 111,994 6,905 –6,680
2019 171,666 122,546 17,032 – 447 5,097 10,580 105,514 49,120 176,210 2,719 – 812 173,491 49,932 –4,544
2020 157,349 116,028 19,193 – 42 11,343 8,795 96,835 41,321 156,421 336 –1,656 156,085 42,977 928
2021 280,746 157,861 41,016 482 31,023 7,841 116,845 122,885 289,169 13,154 254 276,015 122,631 –8,423
2022 108,741 79,022 6,057 482 444 5,071 72,991 29,718 111,948 3,170 –1,459 108,778 31,177 –3,207
2023 71,202 44,484 5,969 460 4,951 723 38,461 26,718 73,186 –4,778 –2,054 77,964 28,772 –1,984
2023 Dec. 11,422 10,971 –1,536 156 –1,448 – 182 12,506 451 10,660 – 11 13 10,671 438 762
2024 Jan. 23,814 10,382 – 457 141 – 406 – 19 10,839 13,431 24,111 1,999 196 22,112 13,235 – 298
Feb. 1,751 –1,458 –1,095 23 – 688 – 430 – 363 3,209 2,272 60 162 2,212 3,047 – 521
Mar. 2,573 –2,329 –1,070 188 – 610 – 455 –1,259 4,902 2,221 358 – 426 1,863 5,328 352
Apr. 15,151 10,159 742 220 1,063 – 481 9,417 4,992 14,331 442 226 13,889 4,766 821
May 8,797 378 210 137 479 – 463 172 8,419 9,214 233 – 46 8,981 8,465 – 416
June 10,169 1,653 461 161 493 – 241 1,190 8,516 9,640 74 – 31 9,566 8,547 529
July 11,733 1,969 225 285 566 – 729 1,744 9,764 11,137 149 47 10,988 9,717 596
Aug. 8,994 – 767 723 407 804 – 725 –1,491 9,761 8,374 235 – 289 8,139 10,050 620
Sep. 6,913 113 321 260 476 – 477 – 208 6,800 8,032 669 380 7,363 6,420 –1,119
Oct. 18,134 5,565 559 56 1,129 – 688 5,006 12,569 19,087 634 199 18,453 12,370 – 953
Nov. 16,362 1,778 –1,841 – 231 –1,154 – 571 3,616 14,584 16,945 555 – 172 16,390 14,756 – 583
1 Including public limited investment companies.  2 Book values.  3 Residual.  4 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values.  5 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of domestic fund shares by non-residents; transaction values.— The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
54•
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2023 2024
 Item 2021 2022 2023 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 45.36 67.77 0.86 –12.62 24.29 12.13 –15.53 –9.29 35.30
   Debt securities 2.81 4.10 6.70 1.79 1.67 –1.25 5.67 1.27 –0.41
     Short-term debt securities 2.29 1.23 1.62 1.06 –0.15 –1.29 2.49 1.62 –0.70
     Long-term debt securities 0.52 2.87 5.08 0.73 1.82 0.04 3.18 –0.35 0.29
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 1.31 3.40 6.68 2.76 0.42 –0.32 2.93 1.28 –1.45
         Non-financial corporations 0.72 0.86 –0.03 –0.34 –0.48 0.03 0.64 0.09 –1.24
         Financial corporations 1.08 1.79 3.19 1.43 0.28 0.06 0.84 1.54 0.09
         General government –0.48 0.74 3.51 1.66 0.62 –0.40 1.45 –0.35 –0.31
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 1.50 0.70 0.02 –0.98 1.25 –0.93 2.74 –0.01 1.05
   Loans 113.65 169.40 178.80 25.52 30.56 55.22 41.01 16.03 30.39
     Short-term loans 115.80 161.85 124.42 19.25 28.42 18.59 32.37 15.80 21.22
     Long-term loans –2.15 7.55 54.38 6.27 2.13 36.63 8.63 0.24 9.17
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 56.25 150.35 175.37 25.83 29.11 47.55 33.57 14.67 17.04
         Non-financial corporations 53.25 146.67 131.62 21.46 24.94 18.47 25.48 12.14 10.26
         Financial corporations 3.37 1.48 12.59 2.44 3.21 –0.57 9.37 2.32 5.67
         General government –0.37 2.21 31.16 1.93 0.95 29.65 –1.28 0.21 1.11
       Loans to the rest of the world 57.40 19.05 3.43 –0.31 1.45 7.67 7.44 1.36 13.35
   Equity and investment fund shares 166.32 182.47 109.10 35.28 26.63 30.50 46.02 46.93 23.61
     Equity 144.34 182.42 105.64 32.95 25.31 31.42 40.26 43.95 22.66
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 15.33 44.06 –14.32 –0.27 4.72 –8.26 3.45 2.81 4.08
         Non-financial corporations 16.89 43.79 –13.91 –0.32 5.06 –8.21 2.43 2.83 3.89
         Financial corporations –1.56 0.27 –0.41 0.05 –0.34 –0.05 1.02 –0.02 0.18
       Listed shares of the rest of the world –1.29 0.61 –38.92 –3.31 –12.85 –1.50 0.20 –1.95 –1.13
       Other equity  1 130.31 137.75 158.87 36.53 33.44 41.18 36.60 43.09 19.71
     Investment fund shares 21.98 0.05 3.46 2.33 1.33 –0.92 5.77 2.98 0.95
       Money market fund shares 0.66 –0.38 –0.58 –0.41 0.59 0.04 –0.53 0.67 –0.18
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 21.32 0.43 4.04 2.74 0.74 –0.95 6.29 2.31 1.13
   Insurance technical reserves 10.24 3.29 10.17 0.28 –0.26 2.19 3.91 –0.83 –0.84
   Financial derivatives 15.40 28.97 –3.35 0.67 12.97 –20.92 3.35 6.65 –11.18
   Other accounts receivable 85.88 49.50 –21.13 –14.49 –71.69 6.95 52.12 –97.39 23.81
   Total 439.65 505.50 281.16 36.44 24.17 84.83 136.55 –36.63 100.69
 External financing
   Debt securities 20.86 14.16 0.35 2.44 1.57 –5.04 6.82 7.07 –0.29
     Short-term securities 2.51 –0.36 –4.68 –0.70 –0.84 –2.99 1.01 2.49 –1.22
       Long-term securities 18.35 14.52 5.03 3.14 2.41 –2.05 5.80 4.58 0.93
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 9.25 5.80 0.66 0.51 0.56 –2.05 2.11 1.16 –3.18
           Non-financial corporations 0.72 0.86 –0.03 –0.34 –0.48 0.03 0.64 0.09 –1.24
           Financial corporations 9.22 4.41 –2.83 –0.27 –0.08 –2.78 1.05 0.41 –2.10
           General government 0.09 –0.07 –0.11 –0.07 –0.04 –0.00 0.01 0.00 –0.02
           Households –0.79 0.60 3.62 1.18 1.16 0.71 0.42 0.67 0.17
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 11.62 8.36 –0.31 1.93 1.01 –2.99 4.70 5.91 2.89
   Loans 186.02 299.22 143.56 39.64 17.12 37.11 35.87 25.78 35.10
     Short-term loans 146.40 211.09 82.90 24.08 14.91 1.78 25.79 27.74 20.52
     Long-term loans 39.62 88.13 60.66 15.56 2.22 35.33 10.07 –1.95 14.59
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 123.87 277.94 177.77 34.91 22.62 35.94 42.81 15.98 14.41
         Non-financial corporations 53.25 146.67 131.62 21.46 24.94 18.47 25.48 12.14 10.26
         Financial corporations 56.19 109.98 65.06 17.67 2.56 19.92 21.20 7.21 2.99
         General government 14.43 21.29 –18.90 –4.22 –4.89 –2.45 –3.86 –3.36 1.16
       Loans from the rest of the world 62.15 21.28 –34.21 4.72 –5.49 1.17 –6.95 9.80 20.69
   Equity 129.01 46.72 18.61 10.53 12.18 0.56 13.30 13.30 12.32
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 26.48 57.05 –27.67 –5.07 1.80 –10.64 –2.21 –4.14 –0.94
       Non-financial corporations 16.89 43.79 –13.91 –0.32 5.06 –8.21 2.43 2.83 3.89
       Financial corporations –2.35 2.21 –8.32 –4.55 –1.88 –1.20 –1.99 –3.86 –4.60
       General government –0.09 0.76 –1.12 –0.21 –0.04 0.01 –2.12 –2.90 0.96
       Households 12.04 10.29 –4.32 0.01 –1.33 –1.24 –0.53 –0.22 –1.19
     Listed shares of the rest of the world 18.84 –9.52 13.66 7.37 1.84 2.45 5.19 7.88 2.11
     Other equity  1 83.68 –0.82 32.62 8.23 8.54 8.75 10.33 9.56 11.15
   Insurance technical reserves 5.54 9.14 5.26 1.31 1.31 1.33 1.33 1.31 1.31
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 14.32 –14.10 8.37 2.08 1.81 2.91 –0.39 1.19 3.10
   Other accounts payable 148.19 175.92 34.07 6.69 –0.63 8.00 –2.74 –2.21 7.77
   Total 503.94 531.06 210.22 62.69 33.37 44.87 54.18 46.44 59.31
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
55•
IX. Financial accounts
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2023 2024
 Item 2021 2022 2023 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 786.9 852.5 849.9 814.4 838.6 849.9 834.5 825.0 860.2
   Debt securities 54.3 53.8 62.1 60.5 62.1 62.1 68.1 69.5 70.0
     Short-term debt securities 7.1 8.4 9.8 11.2 11.1 9.8 12.7 14.4 13.8
     Long-term debt securities 47.2 45.5 52.3 49.3 51.1 52.3 55.4 55.1 56.3
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 23.3 24.7 32.2 31.4 31.9 32.2 35.4 36.9 36.0
         Non-financial corporations 5.3 5.8 5.8 6.2 5.7 5.8 6.6 6.6 5.4
         Financial corporations 14.5 15.0 18.8 18.0 18.3 18.8 19.8 21.5 22.0
         General government 3.5 3.9 7.6 7.2 7.8 7.6 9.0 8.7 8.5
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 31.0 29.2 29.9 29.1 30.3 29.9 32.7 32.7 34.1
   Loans 1,529.5 1,702.6 1,879.3 1,793.7 1,825.6 1,879.3 1,921.6 1,953.2 1,982.3
     Short-term loans 1,279.9 1,444.1 1,566.9 1,519.8 1,549.1 1,566.9 1,599.7 1,631.4 1,650.8
     Long-term loans 249.5 258.5 312.5 274.0 276.5 312.5 321.9 321.8 331.5
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 1,166.3 1,316.7 1,492.0 1,415.4 1,444.5 1,492.0 1,525.6 1,540.3 1,557.3
         Non-financial corporations 1,060.1 1,206.7 1,338.3 1,294.9 1,319.9 1,338.3 1,363.8 1,376.0 1,386.2
         Financial corporations 83.4 84.9 97.5 94.8 98.0 97.5 106.8 109.1 114.8
         General government 22.9 25.1 56.2 25.6 26.6 56.2 55.0 55.2 56.3
       Loans to the rest of the world 363.2 385.9 387.3 378.3 381.1 387.3 396.0 412.9 425.0
   Equity and investment fund shares 3,797.8 3,792.1 3,970.9 3,923.8 3,945.1 3,970.9 4,038.3 4,032.9 4,101.4
     Equity 3,557.6 3,579.5 3,735.3 3,698.4 3,719.1 3,735.3 3,789.4 3,778.9 3,842.4
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 393.0 331.8 334.5 354.8 330.1 334.5 359.7 333.0 338.3
         Non-financial corporations 384.9 324.5 326.7 347.0 322.9 326.7 351.0 324.5 331.5
         Financial corporations 8.0 7.4 7.8 7.8 7.2 7.8 8.6 8.5 6.8
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 72.4 64.7 45.9 49.3 40.0 45.9 48.5 49.3 52.3
       Other equity  1 3,092.2 3,182.9 3,355.0 3,294.2 3,349.0 3,355.0 3,381.2 3,396.6 3,451.8
     Investment fund shares 240.2 212.6 235.6 225.4 226.0 235.6 249.0 254.0 259.0
       Money market fund shares 7.6 7.2 6.9 6.1 6.8 6.9 6.4 7.1 7.0
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 232.6 205.4 228.7 219.3 219.3 228.7 242.6 246.9 252.0
   Insurance technical reserves 51.3 39.4 51.2 48.2 46.7 51.2 55.0 54.6 52.7
   Financial derivatives 105.9 92.2 33.4 56.9 44.7 33.4 35.0 35.2 27.6
   Other accounts receivable 1,570.1 1,745.7 1,832.9 1,807.5 1,833.3 1,832.9 1,872.9 1,830.4 1,869.6
   Total 7,895.8 8,278.3 8,679.6 8,505.0 8,596.3 8,679.6 8,825.4 8,800.9 8,963.8
 Liabilities
   Debt securities 252.3 228.7 239.7 234.8 234.8 239.7 247.0 254.7 259.1
     Short-term securities 9.6 9.3 4.5 8.4 7.5 4.5 5.6 8.7 7.4
     Long-term securities 242.7 219.4 235.2 226.4 227.3 235.2 241.4 246.0 251.7
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 100.6 90.9 96.3 94.1 94.1 96.3 102.3 103.4 102.1
         Non-financial corporations 5.3 5.8 5.8 6.2 5.7 5.8 6.6 6.6 5.4
         Financial corporations 83.1 73.4 74.7 74.3 73.8 74.7 79.3 79.5 79.5
         General government 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.3
         Households 11.8 11.4 15.5 13.3 14.4 15.5 16.3 16.9 16.9
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 151.8 137.8 143.4 140.7 140.8 143.4 144.7 151.3 157.0
   Loans 3,152.0 3,459.7 3,598.1 3,545.5 3,564.3 3,598.1 3,635.6 3,677.8 3,711.5
     Short-term loans 1,569.7 1,784.4 1,863.1 1,848.4 1,864.7 1,863.1 1,887.5 1,931.5 1,950.3
     Long-term loans 1,582.4 1,675.3 1,735.0 1,697.1 1,699.6 1,735.0 1,748.1 1,746.3 1,761.2
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 2,206.9 2,485.9 2,662.5 2,604.4 2,626.3 2,662.5 2,706.4 2,722.4 2,736.6
         Non-financial corporations 1,060.1 1,206.7 1,338.3 1,294.9 1,319.9 1,338.3 1,363.8 1,376.0 1,386.2
         Financial corporations 1,039.6 1,150.8 1,214.5 1,192.6 1,194.7 1,214.5 1,236.0 1,243.2 1,245.7
         General government 107.2 128.3 109.7 116.8 111.8 109.7 106.6 103.2 104.7
       Loans from the rest of the world 945.1 973.8 935.6 941.1 938.0 935.6 929.2 955.4 974.9
   Equity 5,304.9 4,948.7 5,232.5 5,222.9 5,138.9 5,232.5 5,367.9 5,312.6 5,458.8
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 924.7 761.3 807.7 821.5 778.6 807.7 851.7 806.2 821.7
       Non-financial corporations 384.9 324.5 326.7 347.0 322.9 326.7 351.0 324.5 331.5
       Financial corporations 210.1 151.2 173.3 165.2 167.9 173.3 175.4 175.9 175.5
       General government 69.9 69.2 76.0 75.3 70.9 76.0 81.0 75.7 78.8
       Households 259.7 216.4 231.7 234.0 216.8 231.7 244.4 230.1 235.9
     Listed shares of the rest of the world 1,126.4 823.2 951.0 976.3 910.3 951.0 1,029.3 1,000.7 1,046.7
     Other equity  1 3,253.8 3,364.2 3,473.8 3,425.2 3,450.0 3,473.8 3,486.8 3,505.7 3,590.4
   Insurance technical reserves 323.8 333.0 338.2 335.6 336.9 338.2 339.6 340.9 342.2
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 137.4 73.2 32.7 40.6 16.7 32.7 30.4 21.7 28.8
   Other accounts payable 1,592.5 1,775.5 1,806.9 1,792.2 1,846.5 1,806.9 1,799.4 1,812.6 1,854.7
   Total 10,763.0 10,818.8 11,248.3 11,171.6 11,138.1 11,248.3 11,419.9 11,420.4 11,655.1
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
56•
IX. Financial accounts
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2023 2024
 Item 2021 2022 2023 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 145.07 110.37 90.44 25.44 13.51 62.13 31.35 45.76 14.89
     Currency 59.45 44.19 14.16 3.37 2.52 5.34 0.80 3.66 5.56
     Deposits 85.61 66.18 76.28 22.08 11.00 56.80 30.55 42.10 9.34
       Transferable deposits 90.84 47.63 –129.98 –18.16 –32.67 –18.65 –33.47 8.43 –7.62
       Time deposits –5.09 34.49 184.51 43.22 42.53 48.32 60.27 36.01 19.34
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) –0.13 –15.94 21.75 –2.99 1.14 27.12 3.75 –2.34 –2.39
   Debt securities –5.89 25.03 65.16 20.44 14.29 0.69 6.25 3.79 –0.66
     Short-term debt securities 0.31 2.01 11.75 5.68 2.12 –4.04 –2.78 –1.88 –1.98
     Long-term debt securities –6.20 23.02 53.40 14.76 12.17 4.73 9.03 5.67 1.31
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors –3.70 20.31 53.95 16.76 11.99 –0.36 4.78 1.06 –0.92
         Non-financial corporations –0.83 0.50 3.41 1.11 1.09 0.68 0.39 0.62 0.21
         Financial corporations –2.57 17.47 42.65 12.75 9.33 –0.94 4.44 0.52 –1.33
         General government –0.30 2.35 7.88 2.90 1.57 –0.10 –0.04 –0.08 0.20
       Debt securities of the rest of the world –2.19 4.72 11.21 3.69 2.30 1.05 1.47 2.73 0.26
   Equity and investment fund shares 166.89 97.64 55.04 14.86 15.38 8.97 19.74 21.55 30.52
     Equity 61.54 46.45 18.97 5.29 7.48 2.31 6.34 4.72 7.44
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 14.29 12.38 –4.63 0.02 –1.43 –2.31 –1.15 –0.60 –1.91
         Non-financial corporations 12.71 9.96 –3.59 0.10 –0.41 –1.25 –0.52 –0.19 –1.19
         Financial corporations 1.58 2.42 –1.04 –0.08 –1.02 –1.07 –0.63 –0.41 –0.73
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 10.83 8.55 2.89 –0.21 1.73 0.92 1.72 2.40 2.02
       Other equity  1 36.42 25.52 20.72 5.48 7.18 3.70 5.77 2.92 7.34
     Investment fund shares 105.35 51.19 36.07 9.57 7.91 6.65 13.40 16.82 23.08
       Money market fund shares 0.19 0.82 4.39 1.47 1.67 0.82 1.48 2.02 9.17
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 105.17 50.37 31.68 8.10 6.24 5.83 11.93 14.81 13.91
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 0.57 –0.41 1.13 –0.94 –1.05 –2.22 10.32 –1.28 –1.61
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 22.42 10.86 –13.38 0.07 –2.63 –11.19 4.65 4.97 1.69
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 33.25 34.68 25.45 5.96 2.53 14.60 3.90 0.17 5.92
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts receivable  2 6.32 1.38 33.48 –4.44 17.70 –6.50 11.10 –7.56 21.70
   Total 368.63 279.55 257.31 61.40 59.74 66.48 87.30 67.40 72.45
 External financing
   Loans 97.89 83.22 14.36 5.49 6.52 –0.09 –0.80 2.47 9.15
     Short-term loans 0.86 2.59 –0.90 –0.28 –0.50 –0.86 –0.80 –1.18 1.74
     Long-term loans 97.03 80.63 15.26 5.77 7.01 0.77 0.00 3.64 7.41
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 99.61 79.24 18.81 5.72 6.64 3.77 0.73 4.85 7.71
       Consumer loans –0.89 4.60 1.44 1.26 1.66 –2.02 –0.41 –0.77 2.50
       Entrepreneurial loans –0.83 –0.61 –5.89 –1.49 –1.78 –1.84 –1.13 –1.61 –1.06
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 94.32 82.56 12.26 4.69 6.41 –0.64 –0.24 3.58 9.19
       Loans from financial corporations other than MFIs 3.58 0.66 2.10 0.80 0.11 0.55 –0.56 –1.11 –0.04
       Loans from general government and rest of the world –0.00 –0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts payable 0.90 3.96 2.63 –0.35 0.45 2.19 2.91 –1.13 –2.07
   Total 98.79 87.19 17.00 5.14 6.97 2.10 2.11 1.34 7.08
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
57•
IX. Financial accounts
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2023 2024
 Item 2021 2022 2023 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 3,007.6 3,120.1 3,219.6 3,133.8 3,149.0 3,219.6 3,252.6 3,299.1 3,342.5
     Currency 387.1 431.4 445.5 437.7 440.2 445.5 446.3 450.0 455.5
     Deposits 2,620.5 2,688.7 2,774.1 2,696.1 2,708.8 2,774.1 2,806.3 2,849.2 2,887.0
       Transferable deposits 1,764.4 1,811.7 1,686.3 1,737.7 1,705.0 1,686.3 1,652.9 1,661.2 1,685.5
       Time deposits 297.3 334.8 528.7 427.6 471.9 528.7 590.6 627.5 643.4
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) 558.8 542.3 559.1 530.8 531.9 559.1 562.8 560.5 558.1
     Debt securities 109.6 125.0 198.2 177.7 192.5 198.2 206.9 213.0 215.6
       Short-term debt securities 1.8 3.9 12.5 15.9 16.4 12.5 18.4 16.9 15.0
       Long-term debt securities 107.8 121.1 185.7 161.8 176.1 185.7 188.5 196.1 200.6
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 75.3 88.4 147.8 133.0 144.6 147.8 154.5 157.9 159.3
           Non-financial corporations 9.8 9.7 13.5 11.4 12.4 13.5 14.1 14.7 14.7
           Financial corporations 63.2 74.5 122.0 110.9 120.0 122.0 128.1 130.9 132.1
           General government 2.2 4.2 12.3 10.7 12.2 12.3 12.3 12.2 12.6
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 34.3 36.6 50.4 44.7 47.9 50.4 52.4 55.2 56.3
   Equity and investment fund shares 2,478.7 2,330.4 2,581.6 2,488.6 2,479.2 2,581.6 2,716.0 2,754.3 2,858.6
     Equity 1,546.0 1,474.4 1,618.9 1,566.7 1,564.0 1,618.9 1,679.0 1,689.7 1,756.4
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 296.0 255.9 279.2 277.0 262.5 279.2 299.6 283.9 294.0
         Non-financial corporations 250.4 208.7 223.9 225.6 209.5 223.9 236.5 222.3 227.5
         Financial corporations 45.6 47.2 55.3 51.3 53.0 55.3 63.1 61.6 66.4
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 249.2 209.3 247.9 239.5 235.7 247.9 270.2 282.9 285.5
       Other equity  1 1,000.8 1,009.2 1,091.8 1,050.3 1,065.8 1,091.8 1,109.3 1,122.9 1,176.9
     Investment fund shares 932.7 856.0 962.6 921.9 915.2 962.6 1,036.9 1,064.6 1,102.2
       Money market fund shares 2.5 3.3 7.8 5.2 7.0 7.8 9.3 11.4 20.7
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 930.2 852.7 954.8 916.7 908.2 954.8 1,027.6 1,053.2 1,081.6
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 46.4 40.7 43.0 45.4 44.2 43.0 52.8 52.1 51.9
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 1,379.5 1,104.5 1,151.4 1,125.6 1,088.9 1,151.4 1,168.7 1,204.3 1,241.4
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 1,196.7 1,178.4 1,234.5 1,200.6 1,201.5 1,234.5 1,241.8 1,249.8 1,261.9
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts receivable  2 27.5 26.5 35.6 27.6 26.9 35.6 37.8 34.1 31.6
   Total 8,246.0 7,925.5 8,463.9 8,199.3 8,182.3 8,463.9 8,676.5 8,806.7 9,003.6
 Liabilities
   Loans 2,013.7 2,100.8 2,117.5 2,108.6 2,115.6 2,117.5 2,116.4 2,118.6 2,128.1
     Short-term loans 53.0 55.5 55.1 56.4 55.9 55.1 54.4 53.2 55.0
     Long-term loans 1,960.7 2,045.2 2,062.4 2,052.2 2,059.8 2,062.4 2,062.0 2,065.3 2,073.1
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 1,538.7 1,621.3 1,643.3 1,630.5 1,637.7 1,643.3 1,643.7 1,648.6 1,656.5
       Consumer loans 224.5 228.9 230.0 230.8 232.1 230.0 229.6 228.5 230.6
       Entrepreneurial loans 250.5 250.6 244.2 247.3 245.9 244.2 243.2 241.5 240.9
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,920.3 2,004.0 2,016.3 2,010.5 2,016.9 2,016.3 2,016.2 2,019.4 2,028.7
       Loans from financial corporations other than MFIs 93.4 96.7 101.3 98.1 98.8 101.3 100.2 99.2 99.4
       Loans from general government and rest of the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts payable 18.8 23.0 26.2 23.3 23.9 26.2 29.1 28.0 25.9
   Total 2,032.6 2,123.8 2,143.7 2,131.8 2,139.5 2,143.7 2,145.5 2,146.5 2,154.0
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
58•
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
General
governmentCentral
governmentState
governmentLocal
governmentSocial
security
fundsGeneral
governmentCentral
governmentState
governmentLocal
governmentSocial
security
funds
Period € billion As a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus 1
2018 +64.7 +22.4 +10.7 +15.8 +15.7 +1.9 +0.7 +0.3 +0.5 +0.5
2019 +47.0 +18.2 +12.9 +7.0 +8.9 +1.3 +0.5 +0.4 +0.2 +0.3
2020 –151.1 –91.3 –31.3 +6.3 –34.9 –4.4 –2.6 –0.9 +0.2 –1.0
p 2021 –116.4 –132.0 +6.8 +6.3 +2.4 –3.2 –3.6 +0.2 +0.2 +0.1
p 2022 –84.9 –115.2 +16.8 +4.8 +8.8 –2.1 –2.9 +0.4 +0.1 +0.2
p 2023 –107.5 –94.8 –10.1 –11.7 +9.0 –2.6 –2.3 –0.2 –0.3 +0.2
pe 2024 –113.0 –59.3 –27.1 –15.9 –10.7 –2.6 –1.4 –0.6 –0.4 –0.2
p 2022 H1 + 0.3 –31.6 +19.5 +5.9 +6.5 +0.0 –1.6 +1.0 +0.3 +0.3
pH2 –85.2 –83.6 –2.7 –1.1 +2.3 –4.2 –4.1 –0.1 –0.1 +0.1
p 2023 H1 –39.3 –42.5 –4.0 –2.5 +9.6 –1.9 –2.1 –0.2 –0.1 +0.5
pH2 –68.2 –52.3 –6.2 –9.2 –0.6 –3.2 –2.5 –0.3 –0.4 –0.0
pe 2024 H1 –44.4 –26.1 –10.1 –8.0 –0.1 –2.1 –1.2 –0.5 –0.4 –0.0
Debt level 2 End of year or quarter
2018 2,086.4 1,337.2 603.4 162.4 0.7 60.8 39.0 17.6 4.7 0.0
2019 2,075.0 1,315.6 615.0 161.1 0.9 58.7 37.2 17.4 4.6 0.0
2020 2,347.0 1,530.4 667.0 163.0 7.6 68.0 44.4 19.3 4.7 0.2
p 2021 2,502.8 1,683.4 668.2 165.4 0.9 68.1 45.8 18.2 4.5 0.0
p 2022 2,569.9 1,780.2 638.2 172.1 3.1 65.0 45.0 16.1 4.4 0.1
p 2023 2,631.8 1,856.6 622.4 180.5 3.3 62.9 44.4 14.9 4.3 0.1
p 2023 Q1 2,597.4 1,803.8 636.2 173.6 3.9 64.5 44.8 15.8 4.3 0.1
pQ2 2,595.6 1,811.6 627.5 173.1 3.1 63.6 44.4 15.4 4.2 0.1
pQ3 2,637.7 1,855.0 625.4 175.7 4.1 63.8 44.9 15.1 4.2 0.1
pQ4 2,631.8 1,856.6 622.4 180.5 3.3 62.9 44.4 14.9 4.3 0.1
p 2024 Q1 2,638.0 1,857.6 630.7 181.2 3.2 62.6 44.1 15.0 4.3 0.1
pQ2 2,634.2 1,849.7 631.4 183.7 3.6 61.9 43.5 14.8 4.3 0.1
pQ3 2,671.3 1,877.5 637.4 188.3 3.3 62.4 43.8 14.9 4.4 0.1
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations.  1 The deficit/surplus in
accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. In connection with
the publication of the 2024 annual figures, no revised figures were released for the firsthalf of the year. Therefore, the 2024 half-year figures are not directly compatible with
the annual figures.  2 Quarterly GDP ratios are based on the national output of the four
preceding quarters.
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts *
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Period Total TaxesSocial con-
tributions Other TotalSocial
benefitsCompen-
sation of
employeesInter-
mediate
consumptionGross
capital
formation Interest OtherDeficit/
surplusMemo item:
Total tax
burden  1
€ billion
2018 1,598.0 832.9 572.6 192.5 1,533.3 803.9 270.7 188.2 89.8 31.8 149.0 +64.7 1,412.5
2019 1,657.6 859.3 598.2 200.1 1,610.6 844.6 285.1 199.5 96.1 28.1 157.3 +47.0 1,464.6
2020 1,612.7 808.9 608.1 195.7 1,763.8 900.3 296.7 226.9 105.7 22.4 211.7 –151.1 1,424.0
p 2021 1,747.9 907.4 632.2 208.3 1,864.3 937.2 307.2 243.7 106.2 21.7 248.3 –116.4 1,547.4
p 2022 1,852.6 970.0 667.1 215.5 1,937.5 968.5 320.7 252.2 112.2 27.9 256.0 –84.9 1,647.2
p 2023 1,917.4 966.9 709.9 240.7 2,025.0 1,019.1 337.6 264.0 117.1 36.6 250.7 –107.5 1,685.0
pe 2024 2,011.4 1,001.0 754.4 255.9 2,124.4 1,094.3 354.5 277.9 123.7 45.5 228.5 –113.0 1,763.2
As a percentage of GDP
2018 46.6 24.3 16.7 5.6 44.7 23.4 7.9 5.5 2.6 0.9 4.3 +1.9 41.2
2019 46.9 24.3 16.9 5.7 45.6 23.9 8.1 5.6 2.7 0.8 4.4 +1.3 41.4
2020 46.7 23.4 17.6 5.7 51.1 26.1 8.6 6.6 3.1 0.6 6.1 –4.4 41.3
p 2021 47.5 24.7 17.2 5.7 50.7 25.5 8.4 6.6 2.9 0.6 6.8 –3.2 42.1
p 2022 46.9 24.5 16.9 5.4 49.0 24.5 8.1 6.4 2.8 0.7 6.5 –2.1 41.7
p 2023 45.8 23.1 17.0 5.8 48.4 24.3 8.1 6.3 2.8 0.9 6.0 –2.6 40.3
pe 2024 46.7 23.2 17.5 5.9 49.3 25.4 8.2 6.5 2.9 1.1 5.3 –2.6 40.9
Percentage growth rates
2018 +4.5 +4.2 +4.2 +6.8 +3.3 +2.6 +4.0 +3.9 +10.0 –7.8 +3.6 . +4.2
2019 +3.7 +3.2 +4.5 +3.9 +5.0 +5.1 +5.3 +6.0 +7.1 –11.8 +5.6 . +3.7
2020 –2.7 –5.9 +1.6 –2.2 +9.5 +6.6 +4.1 +13.7 +9.9 –20.2 +34.6 . –2.8
p 2021 +8.4 +12.2 +4.0 +6.5 +5.7 +4.1 +3.5 +7.4 +0.5 –2.9 +17.3 . +8.7
p 2022 +6.0 +6.9 +5.5 +3.4 +3.9 +3.3 +4.4 +3.5 +5.7 +28.2 +3.1 . +6.5
p 2023 +3.5 –0.3 +6.4 +11.7 +4.5 +5.2 +5.3 +4.7 +4.4 +31.2 –2.1 . +2.3
pe 2024 +4.9 +3.5 +6.3 +6.3 +4.9 +7.4 +5.0 +5.3 +5.6 +24.3 –8.8 . +4.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office.  * Figures in accordance with ESA 2010.  1 Taxes and
social contributions plus customs duties and bank levies to the Single Resolution Fund.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
59•
X. Public finances in Germany
3. General government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:  3
Period Total  4 TaxesFinan-
cial
transac-
tions  5 Total  4Person-
nel
expend-
itureCurrent
grants InterestFixed
asset
forma-
tionFinan-
cial
transac-
tions  5Deficit/
surplusRev-
enue  6Expend-
itureDeficit/
surplusRev-
enueExpend-
itureDeficit/
surplus
2017 897.6 734.5 7.7 867.8 261.5 327.2 41.9 51.7 13.8 +29.8 631.5 622.0 +9.5 1,414.8 1,375.6 +39.3
2018 949.1 776.3 6.0 904.0 272.4 337.2 39.1 55.1 16.1 +45.2 656.2 642.5 +13.6 1,488.1 1,429.3 +58.8
2019 1,007.6 799.4 11.0 973.9 285.9 348.9 33.5 62.2 16.8 +33.8 685.0 676.7 +8.3 1,571.1 1,529.1 +42.0
2020 944.3 739.9 13.7 1,109.7 299.4 422.0 25.8 68.6 59.9 –165.4 719.5 747.8 –28.3 1,516.2 1,709.8 –193.7
2021 1,105.6 833.3 25.3 1,240.1 310.7 531.0 21.0 69.3 26.1 –134.5 769.2 777.1 –7.9 1,701.8 1,844.2 –142.4
2022 1,144.4 895.9 32.4 1,286.2 325.7 498.8 33.5 72.5 79.3 –141.8 800.5 793.3 +7.2 1,772.1 1,906.7 –134.6
P 2023 1,224.5 915.9 36.4 1,320.1 349.7 479.7 64.4 83.5 31.9 –95.7 820.3 814.5 +5.9 1,904.6 1,994.3 –89.8
2022 Q1 278.2 224.0 5.0 279.3 79.6 116.8 5.5 11.9 7.0 – 1.0 P193.8 P199.8 P–6.0 P430.7 P437.8 P–7.1
Q2 287.9 224.6 5.1 294.2 77.8 126.4 10.6 15.3 5.9 – 6.2 P199.9 P196.7 P+3.2 P444.2 P447.2 P–3.1
Q3 267.7 207.0 13.3 298.8 78.1 116.8 10.8 17.7 10.8 –31.0 P194.0 P197.6 P–3.6 P419.2 P453.8 P–34.6
Q4 318.5 244.5 9.0 413.5 89.7 138.5 6.5 27.5 55.6 –95.0 P210.5 P198.1 P+12.4 P486.0 P568.5 P–82.5
2023 Q1 281.9 215.4 9.3 331.8 81.3 130.7 20.1 13.6 17.8 –49.9 P195.4 P200.8 P–5.4 P441.7 P497.0 P–55.3
Q2 311.6 226.3 9.4 313.1 84.7 117.7 24.2 17.8 2.2 – 1.6 P199.3 P198.9 P+0.4 P476.2 P477.3 P–1.1
Q3 290.5 229.6 7.2 303.1 86.5 103.2 12.6 21.0 4.5 –12.6 P201.5 P205.0 P–3.6 P457.1 P473.3 P–16.1
Q4 347.5 244.6 10.6 375.3 96.7 126.3 11.5 30.9 7.4 –27.7 P218.4 P208.7 P+9.7 P530.8 P548.9 P–18.1
2024 Q1 290.7 225.5 7.9 310.8 92.3 113.9 16.8 17.6 3.7 –20.1 P204.0 P212.1 P–8.1 P460.0 P488.2 P–28.2
Q2 311.8 230.7 6.3 328.9 92.2 110.6 13.7 22.7 8.1 –17.1 P213.0 P214.7 P–1.7 P490.6 P509.4 P–18.8
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data.  1 Annual fig-
ures based on the quarterly figures of the Federal Statistical Office, core budgets and
off-budget entities which are assigned to the general government sector.  2 The annual
figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all pro-
visional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are estimated.  3 The develop-
ment of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in part by statisticalchangeovers.  4 Including discrepancies in clearing transactions between central, state
and local government.  5 On the revenue side, this contains proceeds booked as dis-
posals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expenditure side, this con-
tains the acquisition of equity interests and loans granted.  6 Excluding central govern-
ment liquidity assistance to the Federal Employment Agency.
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus
2017 357.8 352.8 + 5.0 396.7 385.5 +11.3 258.5 247.7 +10.7
2018 374.4 363.5 +10.9 419.6 399.8 +19.9 270.0 260.1 + 9.8
2019 382.5 369.2 +13.3 436.3 419.3 +17.0 282.4 276.7 + 5.7
2020 341.4 472.1 –130.7 455.5 489.0 –33.6 295.2 293.2 + 2.0
2021 370.3 511.9 –141.6 509.3 508.7 + 0.5 308.0 303.4 + 4.6
2022 399.6 515.6 –116.0 534.8 522.5 +12.3 328.5 325.8 + 2.7
2023 425.3 490.2 –64.9 530.9 531.7 – 0.8 358.2 365.0 – 6.8
2022 Q1 94.7 114.0 –19.3 134.6 122.7 +11.9 68.4 73.8 – 5.4
Q2 99.7 123.5 –23.7 133.2 123.6 + 9.6 81.0 77.3 + 3.7
Q3 89.0 127.8 –38.7 126.1 121.4 + 4.7 81.1 80.3 + 0.8
Q4 116.1 150.4 –34.2 139.6 153.4 –13.8 98.0 94.5 + 3.5
2023 Q1 96.2 116.9 –20.7 121.0 122.3 – 1.3 73.3 81.0 – 7.7
Q2 101.8 119.6 –17.7 138.5 133.6 + 4.9 87.0 86.6 + 0.4
Q3 106.1 115.9 – 9.8 123.1 120.0 + 3.2 87.4 91.5 – 4.1
Q4 121.2 137.8 –16.6 146.9 154.4 – 7.5 110.4 105.8 + 4.6
2024 Q1 102.8 111.6 – 8.7 129.2 133.9 – 4.7 76.7 90.6 –13.9
Q2 109.9 115.1 – 5.2 134.4 133.1 + 1.3 91.7 95.0 – 3.4
Q3 114.1 123.1 – 9.0 134.1 134.2 – 0.2 92.3 100.9 – 8.6
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office data and Bundesbank
calculations.  1 Any amounts of the Bundesbank's profit distribution exceeding the
reference value that were used to repay parts of the debt of central government'sspecial funds are not included here.  2 Including the local authority level of the city
states Berlin, Bremen and Hamburg.  3 Data of core budgets and off-budget entities
which are assigned to the general government sector.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
60•
X. Public finances in Germany
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Period Total TotalCentral
government  1State
government  1 European Union  2Local
government  3Balance of
untransferred
tax shares  4Memo item:
Amounts deducted
in the Federal
budget  5
2017 734,540 629,458 336,730 271,046 21,682 105,158 – 76 27,368
2018 776,314 665,005 349,134 287,282 28,589 111,308 + 1 26,775
2019 799,416 684,491 355,050 298,519 30,921 114,902 + 23 25,998
2020 739,911 632,268 313,381 286,065 32,822 107,916 – 274 30,266
2021 833,337 706,978 342,988 325,768 38,222 125,000 + 1,359 29,321
2022 895,854 760,321 372,121 349,583 38,617 134,146 + 1,387 34,911
2023 915,893 774,112 389,114 349,554 35,444 143,663 – 1,882 33,073
2022 Q1 224,006 189,158 92,112 87,240 9,806 24,772 + 10,077 7,261
Q2 224,538 190,982 94,153 86,852 9,977 34,149 – 594 11,576
Q3 205,544 174,232 84,078 80,020 10,133 33,618 – 2,306 7,953
Q4 241,767 205,950 101,778 95,471 8,702 41,607 – 5,790 8,121
2023 Q1 220,950 186,173 93,366 83,536 9,271 26,505 + 8,271 7,665
Q2 221,225 186,597 94,492 82,961 9,144 35,152 – 525 8,959
Q3 230,151 195,334 98,626 87,824 8,884 34,958 – 141 8,678
Q4 243,568 206,008 102,631 95,233 8,145 47,048 – 9,488 7,770
2024 Q1 225,304 188,806 96,283 85,277 7,246 25,910 + 10,588 7,999
Q2 232,175 196,883 100,461 88,881 7,541 35,742 – 450 8,306
Q3 ... 197,514 100,548 89,000 7,965 ... ... 9,337
2023 Oct. . 52,724 26,053 23,611 3,061 . . 2,590
Nov. . 52,443 26,170 23,180 3,094 . . 2,590
2024 Oct. . 56,964 28,553 25,723 2,688 . . 2,482
Nov. . 57,099 28,727 25,646 2,726 . . 2,482
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations.  1 Before deducting or adding supplementary central government transfers,
regionalisation funds (local public transport), compensation for the transfer of motor
vehicle tax to central government and consolidation assistance, which central govern-
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these amounts
which are deducted from tax revenue in the Federal budget.  2 Customs duties andshares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from central government
tax revenue.  3 Including local government taxes in the city states Berlin, Bremen and
Hamburg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms.  4 Difference between local
government's share in the joint taxes received by the state government cash offices in
the period in question (see Table X. 6) and the amounts passed on to local govern-
ment in the same period.  5 Volume of the positions mentioned under footnote 1.
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
€ million
Joint taxes
Income taxes  2 Value added taxes (VAT)  7
Period Total  1 TotalWage
tax 3Assessed
income
tax 4Corpora-
tion tax  5Invest-
ment
income
tax 6 TotalDomestic
VATImport
VATLocal
business
tax
trans-
fers  8Central
govern-
ment
taxes  9State
govern-
ment
taxes  9EU
customs
dutiesMemo
item:
Local
govern-
ment
share in
joint
taxes
2017 674,598 312,462 195,524 59,428 29,259 28,251 226,355 170,498 55,856 8,580 99,934 22,205 5,063 45,141
2018 713,576 332,141 208,231 60,415 33,425 30,069 234,800 175,437 59,363 9,078 108,586 23,913 5,057 48,571
2019 735,869 344,016 219,660 63,711 32,013 28,632 243,256 183,113 60,143 8,114 109,548 25,850 5,085 51,379
2020 682,376 320,798 209,286 58,982 24,268 28,261 219,484 168,700 50,784 3,954 105,632 27,775 4,734 50,107
2021 760,953 370,296 218,407 72,342 42,124 37,423 250,800 187,631 63,169 4,951 98,171 31,613 5,122 53,976
2022 814,886 390,111 227,205 77,411 46,334 39,161 284,850 198,201 86,649 6,347 96,652 30,097 6,829 54,565
2023 829,774 399,271 236,227 73,388 44,852 44,803 291,394 212,596 78,798 6,347 101,829 25,199 5,734 55,662
2022 Q1 203,130 96,245 56,206 20,915 11,178 7,946 73,584 54,234 19,350 615 22,252 8,975 1,459 13,972
Q2 204,740 101,822 60,363 17,194 11,246 13,019 67,763 46,755 21,008 1,521 24,441 7,564 1,630 13,758
Q3 185,552 82,392 43,431 17,598 10,724 10,639 71,164 49,323 21,841 1,471 21,657 7,115 1,753 11,320
Q4 221,464 109,652 67,205 21,704 13,186 7,557 72,339 47,889 24,451 2,740 28,302 6,444 1,987 15,514
2023 Q1 199,764 94,453 55,669 19,728 10,700 8,357 73,522 52,197 21,325 370 23,110 6,815 1,494 13,591
Q2 199,993 98,917 59,538 15,467 12,406 11,506 67,260 47,855 19,405 1,499 24,740 6,142 1,435 13,396
Q3 208,722 98,832 56,370 17,010 9,902 15,550 76,093 56,986 19,106 1,583 24,665 6,160 1,389 13,388
Q4 221,295 107,069 64,651 21,184 11,844 9,390 74,519 55,557 18,962 2,895 29,314 6,082 1,417 15,287
2024 Q1 202,975 97,423 57,101 19,102 10,141 11,080 73,613 56,469 17,144 489 23,846 6,478 1,125 14,168
Q2 211,033 105,931 62,650 14,831 10,361 18,089 71,247 52,496 18,751 1,604 24,634 6,257 1,360 14,150
Q3 211,963 99,029 60,055 18,787 8,696 11,492 76,383 58,085 18,298 1,544 26,550 7,041 1,416 14,450
2023 Oct. 56,324 21,173 17,764 1,009 88 2,312 23,790 17,629 6,162 1,260 7,665 1,981 456 3,600
Nov. 55,988 19,655 17,983 291 –571 1,952 25,787 19,506 6,282 335 7,750 1,971 489 3,544
2024 Oct. 60,921 24,242 18,819 1,654 778 2,991 24,416 18,233 6,183 1,342 8,150 2,267 505 3,957
Nov. 61,032 21,473 19,349 413 –1,392 3,103 28,672 22,351 6,321 266 7,874 2,204 543 3,933
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations.  1 This total, unlike
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of untrans-
ferred tax shares.  2 Respective percentage share of central, state and local government
in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corporation tax and
non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on interest income and
capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12.  3 After deducting child benefits
and subsidies for supplementary private pension plans.  4 After deducting employeerefunds and research grants.  5 After deducting research grants.  6 Final withholding tax
on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings.  7 The allocation
of revenue to central, state and local government, which is adjusted at more regular
intervals, is regulated in Section 1 of the Revenue Adjustment Act. Respective percent-
age share of central, state and local government in revenue for 2023: 47.5:49.7:2.8.
The EU share is deducted from central government's share.  8 Respective percentage
share of central and state government for 2023: 41.4:58.6.  9 For the breakdown, see
Table X. 7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
61•
X. Public finances in Germany
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
of which:
PeriodEnergy
taxSoli-
darity
surchargeInsurance
taxTobacco
taxMotor
vehicle
taxElectri-
city taxAlcohol
tax OtherTax on
the acqui-
sition of
land and
buildingsInherit-
ance
taxBetting
and
lottery
tax Other TotalLocal
business
tax 2Real
property
taxes
2017 41,022 17,953 13,269 14,399 8,948 6,944 2,094 – 4,695 13,139 6,114 1,837 1,115 68,522 52,899 13,966
2018 40,882 18,927 13,779 14,339 9,047 6,858 2,133 2,622 14,083 6,813 1,894 1,122 71,817 55,904 14,203
2019 40,683 19,646 14,136 14,257 9,372 6,689 2,118 2,648 15,789 6,987 1,975 1,099 71,661 55,527 14,439
2020 37,635 18,676 14,553 14,651 9,526 6,561 2,238 1,792 16,055 8,600 2,044 1,076 61,489 45,471 14,676
2021 37,120 11,028 14,980 14,733 9,546 6,691 2,089 1,984 18,335 9,824 2,333 1,121 77,335 61,251 14,985
2022 33,667 11,978 15,672 14,229 9,499 6,830 2,191 2,585 17,122 9,226 2,569 1,180 87,315 70,382 15,282
2023 36,658 12,239 16,851 14,672 9,514 6,832 2,159 2,904 12,203 9,286 2,477 1,233 92,466 75,265 15,493
2022 Q1 4,452 2,840 7,175 2,372 2,594 1,785 531 503 5,061 2,827 701 385 21,492 17,454 3,577
Q2 9,092 3,518 2,872 3,648 2,433 1,722 505 651 4,406 2,238 661 259 21,318 16,839 4,077
Q3 7,103 2,571 3,059 3,742 2,325 1,598 549 710 4,100 2,138 596 281 21,463 16,792 4,249
Q4 13,020 3,049 2,567 4,467 2,147 1,725 606 722 3,555 2,023 611 254 23,043 19,298 3,380
2023 Q1 4,362 2,888 7,637 2,669 2,632 1,749 530 643 3,362 2,368 666 420 21,555 17,471 3,610
Q2 8,796 3,649 3,091 3,830 2,475 1,669 517 712 2,937 2,323 615 267 22,731 18,117 4,192
Q3 9,477 2,607 3,309 3,879 2,339 1,749 532 773 2,997 2,302 577 284 23,013 18,294 4,271
Q4 14,023 3,095 2,813 4,294 2,068 1,665 580 776 2,907 2,292 620 263 25,168 21,383 3,421
2024 Q1 4,488 3,028 8,255 2,672 2,661 1,540 520 681 2,986 2,388 651 453 22,819 18,587 3,718
Q2 8,717 3,491 3,355 3,905 2,533 1,313 460 859 3,050 2,314 609 285 22,745 17,976 4,312
Q3 9,299 2,872 3,546 3,884 2,373 1,362 503 2,711 3,410 2,751 592 288 ... ... ...
2023 Oct. 3,198 492 837 1,451 699 557 171 260 952 729 216 85 . . .
Nov. 3,198 449 1,145 1,167 754 594 171 273 1,004 709 177 80 . . .
2024 Oct. 3,171 629 909 1,810 731 450 150 299 1,158 845 179 86 . . .
Nov. 3,127 454 1,245 1,250 779 547 157 315 1,087 830 205 82 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations.  1 For the sum total, see Table X. 6.  2 Including revenue from offshore wind
farms.
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets *
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  3
of which: of which:
Period TotalContri-
butions  2Payments
from central
government TotalPension
paymentsPensioners'
health
insuranceDeficit/
surplus Total Deposits  4 SecuritiesMemo item:
Administrative
assets
2017 299,826 211,424 87,502 299,297 255,261 18,028 + 529 35,366 33,740 1,335 4,032
2018 312,788 221,572 90,408 308,356 263,338 18,588 + 4,432 40,345 38,314 1,713 4,008
2019 327,298 232,014 94,467 325,436 277,282 20,960 + 1,861 42,963 40,531 2,074 3,974
2020 335,185 235,988 98,447 339,072 289,284 21,865 – 3,887 39,880 38,196 1,286 3,901
2021 348,679 245,185 102,772 347,486 296,343 22,734 + 1,192 42,014 40,320 1,241 3,807
2022 363,871 258,269 104,876 360,436 308,168 23,792 + 3,435 46,087 44,181 1,399 3,746
2023 382,540 271,852 108,836 381,073 325,369 25,346 + 1,467 48,869 46,649 1,637 3,697
2022 Q1 86,684 60,599 25,937 86,841 74,568 5,734 – 157 41,784 39,952 1,367 3,783
Q2 90,040 63,978 25,879 87,138 74,644 5,756 + 2,903 44,425 42,441 1,513 3,761
Q3 89,284 62,891 26,218 92,606 79,400 6,127 – 3,322 41,548 39,767 1,315 3,775
Q4 96,931 70,750 25,995 93,444 79,944 6,170 + 3,487 46,082 44,186 1,399 3,767
2023 Q1 91,370 64,171 26,972 92,422 79,330 6,142 – 1,052 45,109 43,030 1,569 3,724
Q2 94,735 67,459 26,942 92,585 79,177 6,165 + 2,151 47,245 45,043 1,693 3,705
Q3 93,776 66,300 26,950 97,619 83,549 6,513 – 3,843 44,354 42,208 1,632 3,703
Q4 101,578 73,852 27,041 97,967 83,678 6,520 + 3,611 48,825 46,660 1,637 3,697
2024 Q1 96,340 67,378 28,344 97,801 83,894 6,560 – 1,461 46,926 44,166 2,179 3,758
Q2 99,956 71,411 27,848 98,246 83,818 6,604 + 1,710 48,873 46,253 2,024 3,748
Q3 98,881 70,041 28,091 103,565 88,506 7,058 – 4,684 44,821 42,036 2,179 3,744
Sources: German pension insurance scheme and Bundesbank calculations.  * Excluding
the German pension insurance scheme for mining, railway and maritime industries. The
final annual figures generally differ from the total of the reported quarterly figures as
the latter are not revised.  1 Including financial compensation payments. Excluding in-vestment spending and proceeds.  2 Including contributions for recipients of govern-
ment cash benefits.  3 Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or
quarter.  4 Including cash.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
62•
X. Public finance in Germany
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development *
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Period Total  1 ContributionsInsolvency
compen-
sation levy TotalUnemploy-
ment benefit  2Short-time
working
benefits  3Job
promotion  4Insolvency
benefit
paymentAdminis-
trative
expenditure  5Deficit/
surplusMemo item:
Deficit-
offsetting
grant or loan
from central
government
2017 37,819 32,501 882 31,867 14,055 769 7,043 687 6,444 + 5,952 –
2018 39,335 34,172 622 33,107 13,757 761 6,951 588 8,129 + 6,228 –
2019 35,285 29,851 638 33,154 15,009 772 7,302 842 6,252 + 2,131 –
2020 33,678 28,236 630 61,013 20,617 22,719 7,384 1,214 6,076 –27,335 6,913
2021 35,830 29,571 1,302 57,570 19,460 21,003 7,475 493 6,080 –21,739 16,935
2022 37,831 31,651 1,062 37,530 16,588 3,779 7,125 534 6,256 + 300 423
2023 42,245 36,058 748 39,233 18,799 981 7,614 1,236 7,006 + 3,012 – 423
2022 Q1 8,827 7,374 251 10,685 4,424 2,037 1,821 135 1,412 – 1,858 –
Q2 9,327 7,857 262 9,457 4,091 1,180 1,794 147 1,450 – 130 –
Q3 9,278 7,740 261 8,401 4,056 406 1,621 107 1,506 + 877 –
Q4 10,398 8,679 289 8,987 4,016 156 1,889 145 1,888 + 1,411 423
2023 Q1 9,836 8,442 178 9,942 4,727 408 1,858 376 1,550 – 106 –
Q2 10,387 8,976 186 9,661 4,604 290 1,902 271 1,689 + 726 –
Q3 10,361 8,804 182 9,351 4,712 140 1,775 284 1,691 + 1,010 –
Q4 11,661 9,836 202 10,278 4,755 144 2,079 306 2,076 + 1,382 – 423
2024 Q1 10,298 8,903 183 11,237 5,511 465 2,074 380 1,729 – 939 –
Q2 11,019 9,494 196 11,175 5,447 330 2,167 498 1,811 – 156 –
Q3 10,982 9,291 193 10,918 5,609 227 2,027 365 1,897 + 64 –
Source: Federal Employment Agency and Bundesbank calculations.  * Including transfers
to the civil servants' pension fund.  1 Excluding central government deficit-offsetting
grant or loan.  2 Unemployment benefit in case of unemployment.  3 Including seasonal
short-time working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, re-
structuring measures and refunds of social contributions.  4 Vocational training, meas-ures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, integration, compensation top-up pay-
ments and promotion of business start-ups.  5 Including collection charges to other
social security funds, excluding administrative expenditure within the framework of the
basic allowance for job seekers.
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1
of which: of which:
Period TotalContri-
butions Central
government
funds  2 TotalHospital
treatmentPharma-
ceuticalsMedical
treatmentDental
treatment  3Remedies
and
therapeutic
appliancesSickness
benefitsAdminis-
trative
expend-
iture  4Deficit/
surplus
2017 233,814 216,227 14,500 230,773 72,303 37,389 38,792 14,070 14,776 12,281 10,912 +3,041
2018 242,360 224,912 14,500 239,706 74,506 38,327 39,968 14,490 15,965 13,090 11,564 +2,654
2019 251,295 233,125 14,500 252,440 77,551 40,635 41,541 15,010 17,656 14,402 11,136 –1,145
2020 269,158 237,588 27,940 275,268 78,531 42,906 44,131 14,967 18,133 15,956 11,864 –6,110
2021 289,270 249,734 36,977 294,602 82,748 46,199 45,058 16,335 20,163 16,612 11,727 –5,332
2022 315,248 262,367 50,223 310,594 85,061 48,354 46,379 16,737 21,259 17,947 12,418 +4,654
2023 304,441 278,742 21,896 309,596 91,380 50,170 49,047 17,610 23,381 19,112 12,681 –5,155
2022 Q1 79,253 62,142 17,049 81,493 20,550 11,891 11,847 4,286 5,216 4,574 3,510 –2,240
Q2 79,112 64,611 14,280 79,269 21,080 12,053 11,753 4,249 5,335 4,457 2,958 – 158
Q3 75,516 65,242 9,804 75,011 21,164 12,221 11,384 3,956 5,352 4,441 2,996 + 505
Q4 81,512 70,384 9,091 74,894 21,659 12,242 11,566 4,310 5,442 4,486 3,148 +6,617
2023 Q1 73,718 66,513 6,759 77,593 22,293 12,333 12,477 4,372 5,666 4,927 3,169 –3,875
Q2 73,722 68,792 4,495 76,031 22,531 12,414 12,234 4,481 5,806 4,682 3,166 –2,309
Q3 75,330 69,236 5,244 76,967 22,767 12,667 11,959 4,373 6,001 4,695 3,030 –1,637
Q4 81,548 74,199 5,399 78,860 23,364 12,870 12,415 4,440 5,845 4,809 3,452 +2,688
2024 Q1 75,004 70,700 3,617 80,253 24,188 13,455 13,042 4,603 6,194 5,148 3,069 –5,249
Q2 79,051 73,540 4,609 82,224 24,187 13,777 12,945 4,591 6,337 5,118 3,190 –3,174
Q3 78,688 74,065 3,679 81,579 24,562 13,882 12,954 4,462 6,365 5,133 3,195 –2,891
Source: Federal Ministry of Health and Bundesbank calculations.  1 The final annual fig-
ures generally differ from the total of the reported quarterly figures as the latter are not
revised. Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compensationscheme.  2 Federal grant and liquidity assistance.  3 Including dentures.  4 Net, i.e. after
deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying contributions incurred by other
social security funds.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
63•
X. Public finances in Germany
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development *
€ million
Revenue Expenditure  1
of which: of which:
Period Total Contributions TotalNon-cash
care benefitsInpatient
care total  2Nursing
benefitContributions to
pension insur-
ance scheme  3Administrative
expenditureDeficit/
surplus
2017 36,305 36,248 38,862 6,923 16,034 10,010 1,611 1,606 – 2,557
2018 37,949 37,886 41,265 7,703 16,216 10,809 2,093 1,586 – 3,315
2019 47,228 46,508 44,008 8,257 16,717 11,689 2,392 1,781 + 3,220
2020 50,622 48,003 49,284 8,794 16,459 12,786 2,714 1,946 + 1,338
2021 52,573 49,764 53,903 9,573 16,511 13,865 3,070 2,024 – 1,330
2022 57,944 52,604 60,100 10,405 20,542 14,872 3,223 2,166 – 2,156
2023 61,374 58,807 59,178 11,506 22,513 16,035 3,582 2,267 + 2,196
2022 Q1 12,912 12,412 14,739 2,564 4,974 3,572 775 529 – 1,827
Q2 15,350 12,951 14,827 2,464 5,026 3,698 795 548 + 523
Q3 13,708 13,021 15,387 2,638 5,197 3,755 802 542 – 1,679
Q4 15,813 14,067 15,078 2,581 5,281 3,892 837 528 + 735
2023 Q1 14,283 13,169 14,698 2,876 5,377 3,846 843 570 – 415
Q2 14,227 13,668 14,392 2,745 5,539 3,940 869 561 – 165
Q3 15,585 15,228 14,823 2,867 5,776 4,074 891 571 + 762
Q4 16,920 16,469 15,317 2,863 5,782 4,317 949 560 + 1,603
2024 Q1 15,896 15,525 16,546 3,207 6,038 4,387 950 645 – 651
Q2 16,544 16,223 16,792 3,161 6,153 4,581 988 607 – 247
Q3 16,468 16,200 17,162 3,211 6,308 4,697 1,026 600 – 694
Source: Federal Ministry of Health and Bundesbank calculations.  * The final annual fig-
ures generally differ from the total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the
latter are not revised.  1 Including transfers to the long-term care provident fund.  2 In-cluding benefits for short-term care and daytime/night-time nursing care, inter alia.
3 For non-professional carers.
12. Maastricht debt by creditor
€ million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Bundesbank Domestic MFIsOther domestic
financial corporations Other domestic creditors Foreign creditors
of which: of which: of which: of which: of which: Period
(end of year
or quarter) Total Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities Total Debt securities
2017 2,132,784 319,159 305,301 549,782 194,619 180,104 81,125 55,992 10,456 1,027,747 941,750
2018 2,086,445 364,731 350,487 508,845 167,506 186,346 89,794 54,594 8,725 971,929 892,221
2019 2,075,012 366,562 352,025 468,950 158,119 183,714 88,771 66,339 7,225 989,447 908,749
2020 2,346,955 522,392 507,534 508,627 157,828 190,566 99,175 56,574 8,373 1,068,796 997,077
2021 2,502,817 716,004 700,921 501,518 144,646 190,957 102,426 54,498 7,435 1,039,840 970,359
2022 2,569,897 742,514 727,298 512,096 128,893 210,227 125,381 62,087 10,782 1,042,973 976,691
2023 2,631,777 696,287 680,801 463,274 126,354 207,177 124,176 79,277 23,029 1,185,762 1,120,239
2022 Q1 2,504,867 737,978 722,843 484,532 143,411 193,485 105,554 52,456 6,959 1,036,416 969,015
Q2 2,542,827 759,385 744,213 488,213 133,999 202,225 115,121 54,805 8,086 1,038,198 971,491
Q3 2,556,375 741,360 726,147 515,822 126,865 201,750 115,740 56,681 8,987 1,040,761 969,192
Q4 2,569,897 742,514 727,298 512,096 128,893 210,227 125,381 62,087 10,782 1,042,973 976,691
2023 Q1 2,597,356 741,587 726,326 488,074 129,372 208,206 124,049 64,836 16,123 1,094,652 1,030,871
Q2 2,595,555 719,981 704,639 461,101 125,988 208,453 124,069 72,268 20,878 1,133,753 1,069,197
Q3 2,637,724 706,113 690,704 457,940 126,627 207,370 123,410 75,879 23,354 1,190,423 1,124,059
Q4 2,631,777 696,287 680,801 463,274 126,354 207,177 124,176 79,277 23,029 1,185,762 1,120,239
p 2024 Q1 2,637,992 683,097 667,557 460,145 128,895 204,319 123,505 79,368 24,397 1,211,062 1,147,404
pQ2 2,634,221 661,349 645,746 462,646 132,539 202,039 122,056 79,330 24,151 1,228,857 1,165,977
pQ3 2,671,297 645,723 630,043 477,936 140,184 202,322 121,916 80,427 24,134 1,264,889 1,200,474
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
64•
X. Public finances in Germany
13. Maastricht debt by instrument
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:  2
Period
(end of year
or quarter) TotalCurrency
and deposits  1Short-term
debt securities
(up to one year)Long-term
debt securities
(more than one year)Short-term loans
(up to one year)Long-term loans
(more than one year)Debt vis-à-vis
other government
subsectorsClaims vis-à-vis
other government
subsectors
General government
2017 2,132,784 14,298 48,789 1,484,462 89,109 496,125 . .
2018 2,086,445 14,680 52,572 1,456,159 79,487 483,546 . .
2019 2,075,012 14,678 56,350 1,458,540 66,787 478,657 . .
2020 2,346,955 14,757 173,851 1,596,136 88,045 474,166 . .
2021 2,502,817 18,040 195,421 1,730,366 91,705 467,286 . .
2022 Q1 2,504,867 15,982 172,812 1,774,970 74,045 467,058 . .
Q2 2,542,827 18,108 161,848 1,811,062 79,490 472,319 . .
Q3 2,556,375 22,956 149,831 1,797,101 84,946 501,541 . .
Q4 2,569,897 17,319 150,371 1,818,674 115,417 468,117 . .
2023 Q1 2,597,356 15,337 145,250 1,881,491 87,473 467,804 . .
Q2 2,595,555 15,343 153,379 1,891,392 71,973 463,469 . .
Q3 2,637,724 18,123 164,481 1,923,673 65,403 466,045 . .
Q4 2,631,777 16,886 146,625 1,927,974 67,491 472,801 . .
p 2024 Q1 2,637,992 14,910 131,353 1,960,403 63,130 468,194 . .
pQ2 2,634,221 15,822 116,783 1,973,685 57,296 470,634 . .
pQ3 2,671,297 17,224 109,314 2,007,437 62,108 475,213 . .
Central government
2017 1,363,920 14,298 36,297 1,132,336 48,336 132,653 1,131 11,058
2018 1,337,194 14,680 42,246 1,107,522 43,086 129,660 933 10,358
2019 1,315,637 14,678 38,480 1,102,058 29,956 130,465 605 10,493
2020 1,530,351 14,757 154,498 1,180,873 48,416 131,808 609 14,716
2021 1,683,411 18,040 176,428 1,300,604 57,779 130,559 618 8,276
2022 Q1 1,688,335 15,982 155,123 1,340,528 41,679 135,023 576 10,629
Q2 1,727,568 18,108 147,681 1,373,804 47,195 140,781 623 10,691
Q3 1,761,271 22,956 144,999 1,369,815 55,557 167,945 828 13,302
Q4 1,780,240 17,319 146,989 1,391,825 93,225 130,882 8,815 9,213
2023 Q1 1,803,796 15,337 140,238 1,456,522 60,414 131,284 3,574 10,713
Q2 1,811,625 15,343 149,363 1,472,451 42,689 131,780 2,846 11,459
Q3 1,854,968 18,123 159,932 1,504,643 40,273 131,997 6,427 10,090
Q4 1,856,566 16,886 142,897 1,512,508 52,960 131,315 15,158 9,798
p 2024 Q1 1,857,558 14,910 125,678 1,534,058 51,608 131,304 18,264 10,662
pQ2 1,849,680 15,822 110,731 1,548,050 45,204 129,872 17,663 10,495
pQ3 1,877,488 17,224 103,765 1,578,794 47,560 130,145 17,623 11,357
State government
2017 617,000 – 12,543 354,688 20,004 229,764 14,453 2,046
2018 603,422 – 10,332 351,994 19,506 221,591 14,396 1,891
2019 614,978 – 17,873 360,495 21,372 215,238 15,115 1,826
2020 667,033 – 19,354 419,862 22,112 205,704 12,108 1,410
2021 668,182 – 18,994 435,430 17,011 196,747 12,628 1,772
2022 Q1 665,746 – 17,691 440,264 15,496 192,294 11,821 1,915
Q2 661,909 – 14,169 443,117 15,395 189,228 11,581 1,742
Q3 644,999 – 4,834 433,147 17,891 189,126 14,256 2,147
Q4 638,162 – 3,384 432,686 13,147 188,945 11,776 1,771
2023 Q1 636,232 – 5,112 430,715 13,972 186,433 12,111 2,404
Q2 627,451 – 4,213 424,450 15,182 183,606 13,603 2,148
Q3 625,399 – 4,843 424,601 12,319 183,636 11,193 2,827
Q4 622,353 – 4,121 421,451 11,906 184,876 11,704 5,251
p 2024 Q1 630,719 – 5,999 432,488 12,764 179,469 12,573 12,203
pQ2 631,393 – 6,256 432,753 12,010 180,373 12,525 9,543
pQ3 637,358 – 5,690 435,609 14,858 181,200 13,311 10,453
Local government
2017 168,561 – – 3,082 24,932 140,548 1,906 466
2018 162,376 – 1 3,045 20,945 138,386 1,906 497
2019 161,101 – – 2,996 19,633 138,472 1,867 532
2020 162,992 – – 3,366 18,548 141,077 1,413 330
2021 165,380 – – 3,241 17,918 144,221 1,824 313
2022 Q1 164,205 – – 3,052 17,324 143,829 1,895 349
Q2 166,307 – – 2,902 17,242 146,163 1,735 370
Q3 166,213 – – 2,856 15,184 148,172 2,110 392
Q4 172,123 – – 2,896 17,668 151,559 1,679 399
2023 Q1 173,598 – – 2,883 17,481 153,234 2,177 416
Q2 173,067 – – 2,988 18,491 151,587 1,762 741
Q3 175,708 – – 2,825 19,066 153,817 2,371 798
Q4 180,460 – – 2,781 18,006 159,673 2,520 463
p 2024 Q1 181,220 – – 2,723 17,805 160,692 2,385 848
pQ2 183,653 – – 2,602 17,489 163,562 2,382 907
pQ3 188,280 – – 2,924 18,212 167,144 2,661 853
For footnotes see end of table.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
65•
X. Public finances in Germany
13. Maastricht debt by instrument (cont´d)
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:   2
Period
(end of year
or quarter) TotalCurrency
and deposits  1Short-term
debt securities
(up to one year)Long-term
debt securities
(more than one year)Short-term loans
(up to one year)Long-term loans
(more than one year)Debt vis-à-vis
other government
subsectorsClaims vis-à-vis
other government
subsectors
Social security funds
2017 807 – – – 262 545 15 3,934
2018 704 – – – 388 316 16 4,506
2019 899 – – – 375 524 16 4,753
2020 7,641 – – – 7,128 513 6,931 4,606
2021 933 – – – 511 422 19 4,729
2022 Q1 3,613 – – – 3,263 350 2,739 4,140
Q2 3,940 – – – 3,478 462 2,958 4,095
Q3 4,416 – – – 3,839 577 3,330 4,683
Q4 3,084 – – – 1,036 2,047 1,442 12,328
2023 Q1 3,856 – – – 1,840 2,016 2,263 6,593
Q2 3,065 – – – 1,024 2,041 1,442 5,306
Q3 4,083 – – – 1,028 3,055 2,442 8,719
Q4 3,280 – – – 417 2,863 1,500 15,370
p 2024 Q1 3,234 – – – 412 2,823 1,519 11,027
pQ2 3,583 – – – 651 2,933 1,519 13,143
pQ3 3,285 – – – 515 2,770 1,519 12,451
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office and
the Federal Republic of Germany - Finance Agency.  1 Particularly liabilities resulting
from coins in circulation.  2 Besides direct loan relationships, claims and debt vis-à-visother government subsectors also comprise securities holdings purchased on the
market. No entry for general government as debt and claims are consolidated between
different government subsectors.
14. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category
€ million
Currency and deposits  2Debt securities
of which:  3 of which:  3
Period
(end of year
or quarter) Total  1 Total  1Federal
day bond Total  1Conventional
Federal
bonds
(Bunds)Conventional
Federal
notes
(Bobls)Conventional
Federal
Treasury
notes
(Schätze)  4Treasury
discount
paper
(Bubills)  5Federal
savings
notesGreen
Federal
securitiesInflation-
linked
Federal
securities  6Capital
indexation
of inflation-
linked
securities Loans  1
2007 1,000,426 6,675 . 917,584 564,137 173,949 102,083 37,385 10,287 . 13,464 506 76,167
2008 1,031,948 12,466 3,174 928,754 571,913 164,514 105,684 40,795 9,649 . 19,540 1,336 90,728
2009 1,098,584 9,981 2,495 1,013,072 577,798 166,471 113,637 104,409 9,471 . 24,730 1,369 75,532
2010 1,349,563 10,890 1,975 1,084,019 602,624 185,586 126,220 85,867 8,704 . 35,906 2,396 254,654
2011 1,359,259 10,429 2,154 1,121,331 615,200 199,284 130,648 58,297 8,208 . 44,241 3,961 227,499
2012 1,402,753 9,742 1,725 1,177,168 631,425 217,586 117,719 56,222 6,818 . 52,119 5,374 215,843
2013 1,405,276 10,582 1,397 1,192,025 643,200 234,759 110,029 50,004 4,488 . 51,718 4,730 202,668
2014 1,411,880 12,146 1,187 1,206,203 653,823 244,633 103,445 27,951 2,375 . 63,245 5,368 193,531
2015 1,385,956 13,949 1,070 1,188,523 663,296 232,387 96,389 18,536 1,305 . 74,495 5,607 183,484
2016 1,380,165 15,491 1,010 1,179,464 670,245 221,551 95,727 23,609 737 . 66,464 3,602 185,209
2017 1,363,920 14,298 966 1,168,633 693,687 203,899 91,013 10,037 289 . 72,855 4,720 180,988
2018 1,337,194 14,680 921 1,149,768 710,513 182,847 86,009 12,949 48 . 64,647 5,139 172,746
2019 1,315,637 14,678 –1,140,538 719,747 174,719 89,230 13,487 . . 69,805 6,021 160,422
2020 1,530,351 14,757 .1,335,371 801,910 179,560 98,543 113,141 . 9,876 58,279 3,692 180,223
2021 1,683,411 18,040 .1,477,033 892,464 190,839 103,936 153,978 . 21,627 65,390 6,722 188,338
2022 1,780,240 17,319 .1,538,815 947,349 198,084 113,141 137,990 . 36,411 72,357 15,844 224,107
2023 1,856,566 16,886 .1,655,404 1,045,613 216,276 119,180 135,469 . 53,965 60,470 14,686 184,275
2022 Q1 1,688,335 15,982 .1,495,651 911,280 204,534 108,702 140,427 . 23,961 67,776 7,809 176,703
Q2 1,727,568 18,108 .1,521,485 937,949 198,472 111,343 138,495 . 29,425 70,217 11,209 187,975
Q3 1,761,271 22,956 .1,514,814 918,838 208,509 111,675 137,740 . 35,527 71,498 12,879 223,501
Q4 1,780,240 17,319 .1,538,815 947,349 198,084 113,141 137,990 . 36,411 72,357 15,844 224,107
2023 Q1 1,803,796 15,337 .1,596,760 987,363 213,514 120,904 127,143 . 39,459 73,591 15,497 191,698
Q2 1,811,625 15,343 .1,621,814 1,007,004 211,742 124,160 139,012 . 50,243 59,227 13,604 174,468
Q3 1,854,968 18,123 .1,664,575 1,021,675 226,340 125,255 148,407 . 52,763 59,923 13,863 172,270
Q4 1,856,566 16,886 .1,655,404 1,045,613 216,276 119,180 135,469 . 53,965 60,470 14,686 184,275
p 2024 Q1 1,857,558 14,910 .1,659,736 1,054,941 226,133 119,517 119,164 . 58,565 60,312 14,048 182,911
pQ2 1,849,680 15,822 .1,658,781 1,066,616 217,406 124,243 106,105 . 65,074 59,968 15,386 175,076
pQ3 1,877,488 17,224 .1,682,559 1,081,652 232,490 124,060 101,317 . 65,349 59,874 15,641 177,705
Sources: Federal Republic of Germany - Finance Agency, Federal Statistical Office, and
Bundesbank calculations.  1 Comprises all of central government, i.e. all off-budget en-
tities in addition to the core budget, including the government-owned bad bank FMS
Wertmanagement and liabilities attributed to central government from an economic
perspective under the European System of Accounts (ESA) 2010.  2 Particularly liabilitiesresulting from coins in circulation.  3 Issuances by the Federal Republic of Germany. Ex-
cluding issuers' holdings of own securities but including those held by other govern-
ment entities.  4 Including medium-term notes issued by the Treuhand agency (expired
in 2011).  5 Including Federal Treasury financing papers (expired in 2014).  6 Excluding
inflation-induced indexation of capital.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
66•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
2023 2024
2022 2023 2024 2022 2023 2024 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
Item Index 2020=100 Annual percentage change
At constant prices, chained
 I. Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 104.2 103.6 100.6 –1.2 –0.5 –3.0 2.5 –0.6 –3.2 –0.9 –4.0 –2.0 –1.9
Construction 85.5 85.2 82.0 –11.3 –0.4 –3.8 –2.3 –1.0 0.5 1.0 –3.5 –3.5 –3.8
Wholesale/retail trade, transport and
storage, hotel and restaurant services 106.8 105.3 105.3 5.4 –1.4 0.0 –0.9 –2.3 –2.2 –0.3 –0.0 0.7 0.3
Information and communication 109.2 113.3 116.1 0.5 3.7 2.5 4.6 3.7 2.4 4.1 2.9 3.4 2.5
Financial and insurance activities 99.8 99.2 98.5 –7.4 –0.6 –0.7 –3.4 0.1 1.3 –0.4 0.7 0.3 –0.5
Real estate activities 104.2 105.6 106.6 1.8 1.4 1.0 1.1 0.9 1.1 2.2 1.8 1.9 1.1
Business services  1 112.7 113.2 113.2 3.3 0.5 –0.0 –0.7 0.8 0.3 1.6 0.9 1.2 0.3
Public services, education and health 106.0 107.6 109.3 4.5 1.5 1.6 2.6 1.6 0.6 1.3 1.3 1.6 2.3
Other services 118.1 120.5 121.6 16.9 2.0 0.9 3.0 1.6 1.6 1.9 1.4 1.6 1.6
Gross value added 105.6 105.9 105.5 1.7 0.3 –0.4 0.9 0.2 –0.6 0.8 –0.4 0.3 0.1
Gross domestic product  2 105.1 104.8 104.6 1.4 –0.3 –0.2 0.6 –0.4 –0.7 –0.4 –0.8 0.1 0.1
 II. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 108.0 107.6 108.0 5.6 –0.4 0.3 0.1 –0.2 –1.1 –0.2 0.6 –0.3 0.1
Government consumption 103.6 103.4 106.1 0.1 –0.1 2.6 –1.6 –1.9 1.2 1.9 1.3 3.3 2.5
Machinery and equipment 108.2 107.3 101.4 4.5 –0.8 –5.5 4.3 –0.1 –2.9 –3.7 –5.4 –5.5 –5.7
Premises 93.1 89.9 86.8 –3.9 –3.4 –3.5 –4.3 –3.1 –2.8 –3.4 –5.1 –3.5 –2.6
Other investment  4 109.8 115.0 119.4 2.6 4.7 3.9 4.9 4.3 4.4 5.1 4.9 4.4 4.0
Changes in inventories  5,6 . . . –0.1 0.1 0.1 1.0 0.6 –0.3 –0.9 –0.9 –0.5 0.6
Domestic demand 105.9 105.4 105.7 2.8 –0.4 0.2 0.7 –0.2 –0.9 –1.2 –1.1 –0.6 0.7
Net exports  6 . . . –1.3 0.1 –0.4 –0.2 –0.3 0.2 0.8 0.3 0.6 –0.6
     Exports 113.3 113.0 112.1 3.1 –0.3 –0.8 2.5 0.6 –1.7 –2.5 –2.0 0.8 –0.3
     Imports 116.6 115.9 116.1 7.0 –0.6 0.2 3.3 1.3 –2.3 –4.4 –3.1 –0.7 1.2
Gross domestic product  2 105.1 104.8 104.6 1.4 –0.3 –0.2 0.6 –0.4 –0.7 –0.4 –0.8 0.1 0.1
At current prices (€ billion)
 III. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 2,075.1 2,205.6 2,272.5 12.7 6.3 3.0 8.8 7.1 5.1 4.5 3.5 2.6 2.7
Government consumption 869.8 905.2 953.3 6.1 4.1 5.3 2.3 3.1 5.4 5.3 5.4 6.1 4.2
Machinery and equipment 263.0 275.7 264.8 11.7 4.8 –4.0 12.2 6.4 2.0 0.4 –3.6 –3.8 –4.3
Premises 446.5 466.1 464.0 10.5 4.4 –0.5 9.5 4.9 3.0 0.7 –2.3 –0.9 0.6
Other investment  4 148.8 158.0 168.4 6.5 6.2 6.6 6.4 5.8 5.9 6.6 6.5 7.5 7.1
Changes in inventories  5 52.0 7.2 10.6 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 3,855.1 4,017.9 4,133.6 10.6 4.2 2.9 6.8 4.4 2.9 2.9 1.7 2.6 3.2
Net exports 98.7 167.7 172.8 . . . . . . . . . .
     Exports 1,810.1 1,816.6 1,819.3 15.4 0.4 0.1 7.8 1.4 –3.7 –3.4 –1.9 1.4 1.1
     Imports 1,711.4 1,649.0 1,646.5 24.1 –3.6 –0.1 6.6 –2.1 –9.2 –8.5 –5.5 –1.2 2.0
Gross domestic product  2 3,953.9 4,185.6 4,306.4 7.5 5.9 2.9 7.3 5.9 5.4 5.0 3.0 3.6 2.8
 IV. Prices (2020=100)
Private consumption 109.9 117.2 120.4 6.8 6.7 2.7 8.6 7.3 6.3 4.7 2.9 2.9 2.6
Gross domestic product 109.1 115.8 119.4 6.1 6.1 3.1 6.7 6.4 6.1 5.4 3.8 3.5 2.7
Terms of trade 94.0 97.6 98.8 –3.5 3.8 1.3 1.8 4.3 5.5 3.5 2.7 1.1 0.6
 V. Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 2,087.0 2,229.0 2,352.5 6.0 6.8 5.5 6.7 7.1 7.2 6.4 6.3 5.6 5.2
Entrepreneurial and property income 848.9 905.4 821.1 3.8 6.7 –9.3 12.1 10.1 5.1 –0.5 –9.1 –5.9 –8.1
National income 2,935.9 3,134.5 3,173.6 5.4 6.8 1.2 8.4 7.9 6.5 4.5 1.3 2.4 1.2
Memo item: Gross national income 4,097.1 4,332.2 4,449.4 7.8 5.7 2.7 7.2 5.9 5.4 4.5 2.8 3.7 2.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2024. Initial annual
results for 2024: figures computed in January 2025.  1 Professional, scientific, technical,
administration and support service activities.  2 Gross value added plus taxes on prod-
ucts (netted with subsidies on products).  3 Including non-profit institutions servinghouseholds.  4 Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft ware and entertain-
ment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets.  5 Including net increase in valu-
ables.  6 Contribution of growth to GDP .

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
67•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
2. Output in the production sector *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Production
sector,
totalConstruc-
tion Energy Total Inter-
mediate
goods 
Capital
goods 
Durable
goodsNon-
durable
goodsManu-
facture of
basic metals
and
fabricated
metal
productsManu-
facture of
computers,
electronic
and optical
products
and electrical
equipmentMacinery
and
equipmentMotor
vehicels,
trailers
and semi-
trailers
2021 = 100
% of total  1   100 17.08 8.21 74.71 27.84 33.97 2.53 10.36 9.71 9.59 11.83 12.21
Period
2020 95.9 101.4 96.9 94.8 91.9 96.7 93.5 97.5 91.0 90.0 92.6 101.7
2021 99.3 99.1 99.9 99.3 99.4 99.2 99.2 99.4 99.4 99.3 99.3 99.0
2022 98.7 96.7 98.7 99.2 96.3 101.1 101.0 100.1 97.3 102.9 100.2 103.0
2023 97.0 95.6 84.8 98.6 90.7 106.4 93.5 95.6 93.5 103.7 99.3 116.1
2023 Q3 95.7 100.2 72.7 97.2 90.7 103.1 92.1 96.6 93.4 104.4 98.8 107.1
Q4 97.2 101.4 90.6 96.9 84.8 107.9 91.1 94.9 88.8 100.9 102.7 111.6
2024 Q1 92.1 80.4 90.4 95.0 89.3 99.9 89.4 95.3 90.7 96.1 90.0 111.1
Q2 92.9 93.7 76.4 94.6 88.2 100.8 87.8 93.5 90.1 92.2 90.2 112.0
x Q3 91.5 95.6 74.5 92.4 84.9 98.4 85.2 94.6 87.2 91.8 89.4 104.2
2023 Nov. 102.1 103.4 91.1 103.0 91.2 114.5 97.2 98.7 95.2 105.0 103.1 128.4
Dec. 91.1 99.6 96.8 88.5 71.5 103.3 79.8 87.7 76.0 93.8 109.6 89.8
2024 Jan. 83.6 63.0 98.9 86.7 84.3 87.6 81.7 91.5 85.2 90.4 80.3 95.0
Feb. 90.7 81.0 85.8 93.5 87.8 98.8 90.1 92.3 88.8 93.6 87.9 112.9
Mar. 101.9 97.2 86.6 104.7 95.9 113.3 96.5 102.2 98.1 104.3 101.8 125.5
Apr. 93.3 93.1 80.0 94.9 88.4 101.3 87.7 93.1 90.0 92.7 88.7 117.8
May 90.1 91.6 75.4 91.4 86.5 95.5 80.3 94.0 88.0 87.3 86.2 102.7
June 95.4 96.5 73.8 97.6 89.7 105.5 95.3 93.4 92.3 96.6 95.7 115.6
2,x July 91.9 99.2 74.4 92.2 86.8 96.7 84.1 94.2 87.7 90.7 89.3 100.8
2,x Aug. 86.8 90.8 73.6 87.4 82.2 90.8 77.9 92.6 82.9 88.7 81.5 94.0
x Sep. 95.7 96.9 75.5 97.6 85.8 107.8 93.6 97.0 90.9 95.9 97.4 117.9
x Oct. 94.2 98.6 78.8 94.9 87.0 101.2 89.3 96.9 90.7 94.3 90.2 111.0
x,p Nov. 99.2 102.9 87.0 99.7 87.1 111.2 95.2 97.0 91.7 98.7 96.9 122.7
Annual percentage change
2020 – 7.7 + 2.9 – 6.6 – 9.8 – 6.9 –14.0 – 8.2 – 3.8 –11.9 – 7.4 –13.5 –20.1
2021 + 3.5 – 2.3 + 3.1 + 4.7 + 8.2 + 2.6 + 6.1 + 1.9 + 9.2 +10.3 + 7.2 – 2.7
2022 – 0.6 – 2.4 – 1.2 – 0.1 – 3.1 + 1.9 + 1.8 + 0.7 – 2.1 + 3.6 + 0.9 + 4.0
2023 – 1.7 – 1.1 –14.1 – 0.6 – 5.8 + 5.2 – 7.4 – 4.5 – 3.9 + 0.8 – 0.9 +12.7
2023 Q3 – 2.8 + 0.1 –20.8 – 1.7 – 5.8 + 2.8 – 8.7 – 4.1 – 3.4 – 1.2 – 1.0 + 5.9
Q4 – 4.1 – 2.1 – 7.2 – 4.2 – 5.4 – 2.3 –10.6 – 6.9 – 5.3 – 4.4 – 6.2 – 0.7
2024 Q1 – 5.2 – 2.5 – 7.9 – 5.3 – 5.4 – 6.3 – 9.0 – 0.4 – 5.4 – 9.1 – 6.4 –10.5
Q2 – 5.1 – 4.7 – 1.6 – 5.4 – 4.9 – 6.7 – 5.2 – 1.8 – 6.0 –11.2 – 9.3 – 7.8
x Q3 – 4.4 – 4.6 + 2.4 – 4.9 – 6.4 – 4.5 – 7.5 – 2.0 – 6.7 –12.1 – 9.5 – 2.7
2023 Nov. – 4.5 – 2.8 – 7.5 – 4.5 – 6.2 – 2.6 –10.8 – 5.9 – 5.3 – 7.1 – 5.8 – 1.6
Dec. – 3.7 – 0.1 – 4.3 – 4.5 – 4.5 – 3.5 –10.4 – 7.0 – 4.3 – 3.3 – 6.0 – 4.9
2024 Jan. – 5.4 – 6.5 – 3.7 – 5.3 – 6.5 – 5.3 – 9.7 – 1.4 – 5.1 – 7.5 – 5.2 – 9.6
Feb. – 5.7 – 1.6 – 9.5 – 6.1 – 5.4 – 8.3 – 7.0 + 0.2 – 5.6 – 9.0 – 7.8 –13.0
Mar. – 4.4 – 0.4 –10.9 – 4.5 – 4.5 – 5.2 –10.2 – 0.1 – 5.5 –10.6 – 6.3 – 8.9
Apr. – 3.9 – 3.9 – 6.1 – 3.7 – 4.3 – 3.6 – 5.3 – 1.4 – 5.8 – 8.5 – 6.9 – 1.4
May – 7.4 – 6.8 ± 0.0 – 8.1 – 6.4 –11.5 –11.9 + 1.0 – 7.9 –14.7 –11.9 –17.4
June – 3.9 – 3.5 + 1.9 – 4.4 – 4.0 – 5.0 + 1.5 – 4.9 – 4.6 –10.6 – 9.2 – 4.1
2,x July – 5.8 – 5.6 – 1.2 – 6.3 – 6.1 – 7.0 – 8.0 – 3.5 – 6.9 –12.9 –10.2 – 7.3
2,x Aug. – 3.0 – 3.7 + 2.9 – 3.3 – 6.2 – 1.1 – 8.0 – 2.2 – 7.6 –12.0 – 8.8 + 4.1
x Sep. – 4.3 – 4.3 + 5.7 – 5.1 – 6.8 – 4.9 – 6.7 – 0.4 – 5.7 –11.4 – 9.5 – 3.6
x Oct. – 4.2 – 2.6 – 6.2 – 4.3 – 5.1 – 4.4 – 7.2 – 1.3 – 4.6 – 9.2 – 5.5 – 4.9
x,p Nov. – 2.8 – 0.5 – 4.5 – 3.2 – 4.5 – 2.9 – 2.1 – 1.7 – 3.7 – 6.0 – 6.0 – 4.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * For explanatory notes, see
Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tabels III.1.a to III.1.c  o Using
JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Share of gross value added at factor cost of the production
sector in the base year 2021.  2 Influenced by a change in holiday dates.  x Provisional;estimated and adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office to the results of the
Quarterly Production Survey and the Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction
industry, respectively.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
68•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
3. Orders received by industry *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Period 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2021 = 100Annual
percentage
change
Total
2021 99.4 +22.7 99.4 +27.3 99.4 +21.7 99.4 +11.2 99.5 +17.9 99.3 + 8.2
2022 105.1 + 5.7 110.3 +11.0 101.1 + 1.7 109.6 +10.3 113.2 +13.8 108.0 + 8.8
2023 101.2 – 3.7 100.0 – 9.3 101.6 + 0.5 105.1 – 4.1 100.4 –11.3 107.3 – 0.6
2023 Nov. 99.6 – 3.9 96.4 –10.6 100.4 + 0.5 109.7 ± 0.0 112.1 + 9.5 108.6 – 4.0
Dec. 109.0 + 8.0 92.4 – 8.9 121.5 +19.9 96.5 + 1.8 88.2 – 7.0 100.3 + 5.7
2024 Jan. 98.2 – 5.0 98.1 –12.0 98.0 + 0.1 100.4 – 3.9 85.1 – 8.8 107.3 – 2.0
Feb. 96.3 – 8.7 94.4 –11.3 96.4 – 7.8 106.2 – 1.5 89.0 –15.2 114.0 + 4.5
Mar. 105.8 – 2.5 102.6 – 7.5 106.9 + 0.4 113.2 + 1.2 105.7 – 8.4 116.7 + 5.8
Apr. 93.1 – 1.8 93.8 – 7.5 91.0 + 1.9 104.7 + 0.5 94.5 – 9.9 109.3 + 5.1
May 92.3 – 8.3 93.9 – 5.3 89.3 –12.2 107.6 + 8.6 113.6 +23.7 104.9 + 2.4
June 100.7 –10.9 94.4 – 7.5 104.7 –13.4 102.5 – 5.3 96.5 – 8.4 105.3 – 3.8
July 101.0 + 5.5 97.4 + 2.6 103.4 + 8.7 100.7 – 3.9 90.6 + 2.5 105.3 – 6.2
Aug. 87.9 – 2.1 87.6 – 3.4 86.9 + 0.1 97.3 –10.1 81.3 –22.6 104.6 – 4.5
Sep. 103.3 + 4.8 90.8 – 6.0 111.9 +12.3 101.9 + 1.1 97.3 + 1.7 104.0 + 1.0
Oct. 102.4 + 6.4 94.4 – 2.7 107.0 +13.3 107.7 + 1.7 106.7 + 7.7 108.2 – 0.7
p Nov. 98.9 – 0.7 97.0 + 0.6 99.9 – 0.5 100.6 – 8.3 92.2 –17.8 104.4 – 3.9
From the domestic market
2021 99.3 +21.7 99.4 +26.9 99.3 +19.1 99.3 +10.2 99.2 + 8.9 99.3 +10.7
2022 105.6 + 6.3 112.5 +13.2 98.7 – 0.6 109.7 +10.5 111.2 +12.1 109.1 + 9.9
2023 100.9 – 4.5 103.1 – 8.4 99.1 + 0.4 99.7 – 9.1 99.5 –10.5 99.7 – 8.6
2023 Nov. 99.1 – 6.5 100.0 –10.5 98.1 – 1.3 99.8 –13.9 97.4 –12.5 100.7 –14.4
Dec. 98.4 – 0.9 97.0 – 8.5 100.4 + 5.4 93.8 +10.5 89.9 + 5.8 95.3 +12.4
2024 Jan. 94.4 – 8.0 99.6 –13.2 89.7 – 2.9 94.3 – 4.1 85.5 – 9.9 97.8 – 1.8
Feb. 95.7 –10.1 96.4 –12.8 94.7 – 8.5 97.9 – 4.6 86.1 –13.6 102.6 – 1.2
Mar. 102.3 – 9.1 102.0 –11.1 102.3 – 7.6 104.1 – 5.5 100.9 –14.0 105.4 – 1.9
Apr. 90.9 – 8.6 94.7 –13.0 86.7 – 4.9 96.8 – 1.6 94.9 – 8.4 97.5 + 1.1
May 91.9 –13.1 92.8 –10.3 91.0 –16.6 92.8 – 3.4 85.1 –14.3 95.9 + 1.1
June 101.6 – 5.7 95.6 – 4.1 107.8 – 7.5 96.0 + 0.2 90.2 – 4.0 98.3 + 1.9
July 104.7 + 6.4 100.2 + 2.8 110.1 +11.2 95.5 – 4.5 85.7 –12.0 99.3 – 1.7
Aug. 85.1 – 6.4 89.5 – 5.7 79.7 – 7.5 95.4 – 3.7 84.5 –18.6 99.7 + 2.6
Sep. 95.6 + 2.0 87.2 – 8.6 102.6 +12.4 100.1 + 1.0 100.3 – 2.9 100.0 + 2.6
Oct. 91.7 – 4.5 94.1 – 6.1 88.3 – 3.2 100.8 – 2.0 96.6 + 3.2 102.5 – 3.8
p Nov. 97.7 – 1.4 96.8 – 3.2 98.3 + 0.2 99.8 ± 0.0 90.2 – 7.4 103.6 + 2.9
From abroad
2021 99.5 +23.6 99.4 +27.6 99.5 +23.1 99.4 +11.7 99.6 +23.4 99.3 + 6.5
2022 104.8 + 5.3 108.1 + 8.8 102.5 + 3.0 109.6 +10.3 114.4 +14.9 107.2 + 8.0
2023 101.5 – 3.1 96.8 –10.5 103.0 + 0.5 108.8 – 0.7 100.9 –11.8 112.8 + 5.2
2023 Nov. 100.0 – 1.8 92.8 –10.8 101.8 + 1.6 116.4 +10.3 120.5 +24.0 114.3 + 4.2
Dec. 116.6 +14.3 87.9 – 9.3 133.7 +27.7 98.4 – 3.1 87.2 –13.2 104.0 + 1.8
2024 Jan. 101.0 – 2.9 96.7 –10.8 102.8 + 1.7 104.5 – 3.9 84.8 – 8.1 114.3 – 2.1
Feb. 96.8 – 7.5 92.5 – 9.6 97.3 – 7.4 111.8 + 0.4 90.7 –16.1 122.3 + 8.2
Mar. 108.3 + 2.5 103.1 – 3.7 109.6 + 5.3 119.4 + 5.6 108.4 – 5.2 124.9 +11.1
Apr. 94.6 + 3.4 93.0 – 1.0 93.5 + 6.0 110.0 + 1.7 94.2 –10.9 117.9 + 7.7
May 92.6 – 4.4 94.9 – 0.1 88.3 – 9.4 117.7 +16.4 130.0 +48.6 111.5 + 3.4
June 100.1 –14.3 93.2 –10.6 102.9 –16.5 106.9 – 8.3 100.1 –10.5 110.4 – 7.2
July 98.4 + 4.9 94.7 + 2.6 99.5 + 7.2 104.3 – 3.5 93.5 +12.4 109.7 – 9.0
Aug. 89.9 + 1.0 85.8 – 0.8 91.0 + 4.4 98.6 –13.7 79.5 –24.9 108.1 – 8.7
Sep. 108.9 + 6.7 94.3 – 3.5 117.2 +12.3 103.2 + 1.3 95.5 + 4.5 107.0 – 0.1
Oct. 110.1 +14.2 94.7 + 1.0 117.8 +22.3 112.4 + 4.2 112.5 +10.1 112.4 + 1.5
p Nov. 99.7 – 0.3 97.1 + 4.6 100.8 – 1.0 101.1 –13.1 93.3 –22.6 105.0 – 8.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; for ex-
planatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables
III.2.a to III.2.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
69•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
4. Orders received by construction *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1
Structural engineering
Total TotalResidential
constructionIndustrial
constructionPublic sector
constructionCivil
engineering 
Industrial clientsPublic
sector  2
Zeit 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2021 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2020 91.1 –0.3 87.4 –0.7 91.9 +7.0 82.6 –8.6 88.4 +1.8 95.7 +0.1 85.9 –5.7 97.1 +1.5
2021 99.5 +9.2 99.4 +13.7 99.5 +8.3 99.4 +20.3 99.1 +12.1 99.6 +4.1 99.4 +15.7 99.5 +2.5
2022 104.4 +4.9 98.0 –1.4 95.7 –3.8 98.4 –1.0 104.3 +5.2 112.4 +12.9 105.8 +6.4 108.8 +9.3
2023 108.2 +3.6 93.6 –4.5 83.2 –13.1 96.2 –2.2 121.4 +16.4 126.6 +12.6 117.3 +10.9 114.8 +5.5
2023 Oct. 106.9 +6.1 87.8 +0.1 81.9 –3.5 89.5 +1.2 103.1 +7.8 130.7 +11.7 121.0 +14.6 107.2 +0.9
Nov. 92.1 –0.8 83.1 +1.8 70.9 –5.0 89.2 +10.5 105.0 –4.5 103.3 –3.4 104.7 +9.5 91.4 –10.8
Dec. 110.2 +5.7 97.8 –0.6 91.6 +3.9 89.1 –15.6 152.2 +39.5 125.6 +12.5 117.5 +0.7 114.3 +14.0
2024 Jan. 85.7 +3.5 71.8 –5.8 60.4 –16.6 77.8 –4.5 91.1 +30.0 103.0 +13.2 96.7 +7.7 90.0 +10.7
Feb. 96.7 +2.0 77.8 –1.5 71.9 –1.4 72.0 –14.5 120.4 +47.2 120.3 +5.0 101.6 –1.3 108.4 +8.0
Mar. 123.8 +2.3 102.4 –5.9 91.2 +3.2 103.4 –17.7 139.2 +15.3 150.5 +10.5 121.8 –9.1 149.8 +16.9
Apr. 109.9 +4.0 85.6 –4.0 82.3 –0.6 82.7 –7.4 108.0 –3.8 140.1 +11.0 117.4 +7.6 120.3 +2.0
May 112.8 +2.3 97.8 +5.0 85.0 –3.3 108.5 +15.8 104.3 –4.7 131.6 –0.1 119.4 +3.4 124.7 +4.2
June 119.6 +5.5 97.0 –2.4 84.3 –10.6 101.0 +17.2 127.9 –23.3 147.7 +12.8 130.3 +18.2 131.5 +0.2
July 110.9 –8.5 87.5 –15.4 80.8 –12.3 83.2 –20.8 127.9 –7.7 139.9 –2.4 111.9 –4.2 131.2 –11.1
Aug. 116.6 –2.9 95.3 +2.3 80.6 +0.6 104.8 +5.2 113.1 –2.9 143.3 –6.8 134.2 –9.9 120.5 +6.9
Sep. 108.9 –9.6 93.2 –16.5 85.3 +2.9 91.3 –24.7 128.7 –28.5 128.6 –2.1 114.7 –16.6 118.7 –5.7
Oct. 108.1 +1.1 87.8 ±0.0 80.0 –2.3 88.3 –1.3 113.7 +10.3 133.5 +2.1 114.0 –5.8 120.9 +12.8
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; exclu-
ding value added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series – Seasonally adjustedbusiness statistics, Table III.2.f.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Excluding residential
construction.  2 Including road construction.
5. Retail trade turnover *
Adjusted for calendar variations o
of which:
In stores by enterprises main product range
Total 
Food, beverages,
tobacco  1Textiles,
clothing,
foodwear and
leather goodsInformation
and
communications
equipmentConstruction
and flooring
materials,
household
appliances,
furnitureRetail sale of
pharmaceutical
and medical
goods, cosmetic
and toilet
articlesRetail sale via
mail order houses
or via internet
as well as
other retail sale  2
At current
prices At 2015 prices At current prices
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2020 121.4 +5.7 115.9 +4.4 121.3 +8.1 81.9 –23.2 106.9 –1.8 117.1 +9.3 125.4 +5.6 168.6 +21.8
2021 124.7 +2.7 116.7 +0.7 121.7 +0.3 78.1 –4.6 95.4 –10.8 110.4 –5.7 135.2 +7.8 190.1 +12.8
2022 134.4 +7.8 115.8 –0.8 128.2 +5.3 102.9 +31.8 107.8 +13.0 122.8 +11.2 144.7 +7.0 188.9 –0.6
3 2023 137.6 +2.4 112.2 –3.1 136.0 +6.1 106.0 +3.0 108.0 +0.2 118.3 –3.7 149.5 +3.3 186.7 –1.2
2023 Nov. 147.7 +0.9 120.1 –1.6 137.7 +4.1 116.7 +0.8 137.3 +1.8 122.4 –6.1 156.6 +2.3 231.4 –0.9
Dec. 154.2 +1.8 124.9 –0.8 155.1 +5.4 116.6 –6.1 142.5 –3.5 117.4 –6.7 167.0 +6.1 215.8 +1.1
2024 Jan. 127.0 +1.8 103.0 –1.2 127.5 +3.9 87.5 +2.7 107.2 –5.7 98.0 –7.2 150.5 +7.5 177.1 +0.4
Feb. 123.4 +0.4 99.6 –1.8 124.6 +1.2 82.7 –0.4 97.6 –3.9 103.7 –4.2 145.8 +7.9 160.9 –3.7
Mar. 143.7 +3.4 115.3 +1.5 143.8 +4.7 104.7 +4.9 102.0 –4.5 127.3 –1.2 157.7 +5.2 191.7 +2.8
Apr. 140.6 +2.3 112.7 +0.8 140.2 +2.1 109.8 +2.3 95.4 +0.1 123.7 –1.7 155.2 +7.7 179.1 –0.8
May 141.3 +0.1 113.3 –1.3 141.2 +1.0 112.0 –0.4 92.5 +0.9 120.5 –5.6 155.1 +4.9 183.5 –0.7
June 137.4 –0.4 110.3 –1.7 140.9 +3.1 102.4 –12.3 98.0 +3.0 113.1 –6.0 153.7 +3.6 175.8 –2.4
July 141.3 +1.2 113.9 –0.1 141.6 +1.1 106.4 –1.6 98.3 –1.1 113.4 –4.0 164.0 +7.3 184.6 +0.7
Aug. 136.8 +3.2 110.2 +2.2 139.2 +4.7 98.5 –3.0 93.7 –3.5 105.7 –4.9 154.5 +6.2 183.0 +8.5
Sep. 139.1 +4.7 112.2 +4.6 134.1 +1.3 110.7 +6.3 102.8 –1.0 110.1 –1.9 162.3 +8.3 201.5 +18.9
Oct. 146.4 +3.4 117.4 +2.4 142.2 +3.7 116.4 –3.6 110.2 –0.8 118.6 –2.3 165.7 +5.9 211.9 +8.2
Nov. 153.6 +4.0 123.7 +3.0 143.6 +4.3 115.8 –0.8 140.2 +2.1 120.8 –1.3 167.2 +6.8 249.6 +7.9
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * Excluding value added tax;
for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics,
Table III.4.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Including stalls and markets.  2 Excludingstores, stalls and markets.  3 As of January 2023 figures are provisional, partially revised,
and particularly uncertain in recent months due to estimates for missing reports.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
70•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
6. Labour market *
Employment  1 Employment subject to social contributions  2 Short-time workers  3 Unemployment  4
Total of which: of which: of which:
Produc-
tion 
sectorServices 
excluding 
temporary 
employ-
mentTemporary 
employ-
mentSolely
jobs
exempt
from
social
contri-
butions  2TotalCyclically
induced TotalAssigned
to the
legal
category
of the
Third Book
of the
Social
Security
Code
(SGB III)
PeriodThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
changeThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
change ThousandsUnem-
ploy-
ment
rate 
in %  4,5Vacan-
cies, 
thou-
sands  4,6
2020 44,965 –0.7 33,579 +0.2 9,395 23,277 660 4,290 2,939 2,847 2,695 1,137 5.9 613
2021 45,052 +0.2 33,897 +0.9 9,344 23,602 702 4,101 1,852 1,744 2,613 999 5.7 706
2022 45,675 +1.4 34,507 +1.8 9,400 24,135 721 4,125 426 337 2,418 808 5.3 845
2023 46,011 +0.7 34,790 +0.8 9,425 24,430 687 4,198 241 147 2,609 875 5.7 761
2024 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,787 980 6.0 694
2021 Q4 45,518 +1.0 34,374 +1.6 9,415 23,982 727 4,125 835 762 2,341 802 5.1 804
2022 Q1 45,284 +1.6 34,242 +2.0 9,348 23,943 715 4,061 1,033 792 2,417 874 5.3 818
Q2 45,605 +1.6 34,401 +2.0 9,372 24,056 718 4,112 337 324 2,311 777 5.0 864
Q3 45,776 +1.2 34,522 +1.7 9,405 24,133 724 4,159 103 92 2,501 804 5.5 880
Q4 46,035 +1.1 34,864 +1.4 9,475 24,409 730 4,166 229 139 2,443 778 5.3 817
2023 Q1 45,712 +0.9 34,614 +1.1 9,395 24,288 696 4,152 430 153 2,610 900 5.7 773
Q2 45,981 +0.8 34,702 +0.9 9,410 24,352 687 4,209 152 146 2,561 839 5.6 770
Q3 46,080 +0.7 34,762 +0.7 9,421 24,398 686 4,242 128 122 2,647 885 5.7 768
Q4 46,269 +0.5 35,082 +0.6 9,471 24,682 680 4,189 253 166 2,617 874 5.7 732
2024 Q1 r45,876 r +0.4 34,795 +0.5 9,366 24,563 630 4,154 468 200 2,796 1,000 6.1 704
Q2 r46,087 r +0.2 34,858 +0.4 9,355 24,635 615 4,207 212 204 2,733 939 7 5.9 701
Q3 r46,101 r +0.0 834,889 8+0.4 89,347 824,679 8 610 84,216 ... 8 195 2,829 998 6.0 699
Q4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,790 983 6.0 670
2021 Aug. 45,158 +0.8 33,994 +1.5 9,358 23,658 722 4,153 857 838 2,578 940 5.6 779
Sep. 45,394 +0.8 34,323 +1.6 9,432 23,903 726 4,123 859 839 2,465 864 5.4 799
Oct. 45,511 +0.8 34,369 +1.5 9,425 23,965 724 4,123 780 762 2,377 814 5.2 809
Nov. 45,567 +1.1 34,449 +1.6 9,423 24,039 739 4,133 767 750 2,317 789 5.1 808
Dec. 45,475 +1.2 34,284 +1.7 9,364 23,980 708 4,112 957 772 2,330 803 5.1 794
2022 Jan. 45,218 +1.5 34,176 +2.0 9,332 23,900 711 4,048 1,123 847 2,462 903 5.4 792
Feb. 45,263 +1.6 34,243 +2.2 9,346 23,939 719 4,049 1,087 803 2,428 884 5.3 822
Mar. 45,370 +1.6 34,334 +2.1 9,369 23,999 719 4,061 888 727 2,362 835 5.1 839
Apr. 45,489 +1.6 34,368 +2.0 9,366 24,037 713 4,091 453 439 2,309 800 5.0 852
May 45,621 +1.7 34,445 +2.1 9,376 24,089 719 4,131 318 305 2,260 771 4.9 865
June 45,705 +1.5 34,445 +1.9 9,376 24,084 724 4,164 241 228 2,363 761 5.2 877
July 45,663 +1.3 34,322 +1.8 9,361 23,988 718 4,176 115 102 2,470 801 5.4 881
Aug. 45,716 +1.2 34,571 +1.7 9,417 24,169 725 4,151 87 76 2,547 827 5.6 887
Sep. 45,948 +1.2 34,899 +1.7 9,499 24,401 733 4,136 108 97 2,486 782 5.4 873
Oct. 46,070 +1.2 34,893 +1.5 9,489 24,414 734 4,161 134 124 2,442 764 5.3 846
Nov. 46,078 +1.1 34,897 +1.3 9,478 24,435 738 4,179 156 147 2,434 770 5.3 823
Dec. 45,957 +1.1 34,705 +1.2 9,414 24,357 704 4,182 397 146 2,454 799 5.4 781
2023 Jan. 45,651 +1.0 34,550 +1.1 9,381 24,240 697 4,138 451 145 2,616 911 5.7 764
Feb. 45,697 +1.0 34,601 +1.0 9,392 24,279 692 4,148 441 157 2,620 910 5.7 778
Mar. 45,789 +0.9 34,679 +1.0 9,412 24,332 692 4,157 398 159 2,594 878 5.7 777
Apr. 45,886 +0.9 34,685 +0.9 9,410 24,342 684 4,188 146 139 2,586 855 5.7 773
May 45,994 +0.8 34,728 +0.8 9,413 24,371 687 4,228 149 142 2,544 829 5.5 767
June 46,062 +0.8 34,709 +0.8 9,404 24,357 690 4,266 162 156 2,555 833 5.5 769
July 46,030 +0.8 34,584 +0.8 9,382 24,261 687 4,279 113 107 2,617 878 5.7 772
Aug. 46,013 +0.6 34,804 +0.7 9,429 24,433 685 4,221 113 107 2,696 910 5.8 771
Sep. 46,196 +0.5 35,089 +0.5 9,500 24,641 684 4,186 158 152 2,627 869 5.7 761
Oct. 46,296 +0.5 35,117 +0.6 9,490 24,686 686 4,181 183 177 2,607 861 5.7 749
Nov. 46,319 +0.5 35,126 +0.7 9,473 24,719 688 4,195 181 174 2,606 865 5.6 733
Dec. 46,193 +0.5 34,915 +0.6 9,401 24,637 648 4,197 395 148 2,637 896 5.7 713
2024 Jan. r45,846 r +0.4 34,754 +0.6 9,359 24,528 635 4,138 540 189 2,805 1,006 6.1 699
Feb. r45,857 r +0.4 34,770 +0.5 9,359 24,548 625 4,141 485 201 2,814 1,015 6.1 706
Mar. r45,925 r +0.3 34,810 +0.4 9,360 24,591 615 4,169 379 210 2,769 977 6.0 707
Apr. r46,015 r +0.3 34,863 +0.5 9,362 24,633 618 4,190 224 215 2,750 949 6.0 701
May r46,114 r +0.3 34,886 +0.5 9,354 24,661 615 4,222 200 191 2,723 930 7 5.8 702
June r46,132 r +0.2 34,837 +0.4 9,336 24,635 611 4,250 213 204 2,727 937 5.8 701
July r46,077 r +0.1 834,724 8+0.4 89,313 824,549 8 613 84,258 ... 8 194 2,809 989 6.0 703
Aug. r46,033 r +0.0 834,914 8+0.3 89,351 824,705 8 605 84,193 ... 8 165 2,872 1,021 6.1 699
Sep. r46,192 r –0.0 835,221 8+0.4 89,416 824,934 8 612 84,145 ... 8 225 2,806 985 6.0 696
Oct. r46,293 r –0.0 835,234 8+0.3 89,391 824,980 8 613 84,138 ... 8 287 2,791 974 6.0 689
Nov. 946,319 9 ±0.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,774 973 5.9 668
Dec. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,807 1,003 6.0 654
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency.  * Annual and quarterly
figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the official figures are
due to rounding.  1 Workplace concept; averages.  2 Monthly figures: end of month.
3 Number within a given month.  4 Mid-month level.  5 Relative to the total civilian
labour force.  6 Excluding government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs,
including jobs located abroad.  7 From May 2024, calculated on the basis of new labourforce figures.  8 Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. In
2022 and 2023, the estimated values for Germany deviated from the final data by a
maximum of 0.1% for employees subject to social contributions, by a maximum of
0.5% for persons solely in jobs exempt from social contributions, and by a maximum of
61,3% for cyclically induced short-time work.  9 Initial preliminary estimate by the Fed-
eral Statistical Office.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
71•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
7. Prices
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
of which: Indices of
foreign trade prices
of which:
Total Food  1,2Non-
energy
industrial
goods  1 Energy  1 Services  1Actual
rents
for
housing  1Memo item:
Consumer
price index
(national
concept)Con-
struction
price
indexIndex of
producer
prices of
industrial
products
sold on
the
domestic
market  3Index of
producer
prices of
agri-
cultural
products  3 Exports Imports
Period 2015 = 100 2020 = 100 2021 = 100 2020 = 100 2021=100
Index level
2021 4 109.2 4 114.1 4 106.7 4 109.0 4 109.0 109.0 4 103.1 4 100.0 100.0 106.9 100.0 100.0
2022 118.7 126.2 112.7 146.8 112.2 110.8 110.2 116.6 129.8 141.0 113.5 121.8
2023 125.9 140.9 119.1 154.2 117.6 113.1 116.7 126.7 130.1 141.3 114.2 113.9
2024 129.0 144.8 120.8 149.3 122.6 115.5 119.3 130.8 127.7 ... ... ...
2023 Feb. 123.8 139.5 117.0 154.9 115.0 112.2 115.2 125.5 132.5 148.6 115.1 117.2
Mar. 125.1 141.3 118.3 155.0 116.1 112.5 116.1 131.1 144.6 115.0 116.1
Apr. 125.8 141.1 119.0 156.1 117.1 112.6 116.6 131.8 141.9 114.6 114.6
May 125.6 141.1 119.3 154.0 116.9 112.8 116.5 126.6 130.4 139.1 114.2 113.2
June 126.1 141.2 119.5 153.7 117.8 113.0 116.8 129.8 141.4 114.0 112.3
July 126.7 141.2 118.8 153.6 119.6 113.2 117.1 128.9 142.5 113.7 111.6
Aug. 127.2 141.0 119.2 156.5 119.8 113.5 117.5 127.1 129.2 142.5 113.7 112.0
Sep. 127.4 141.5 120.1 157.6 119.3 113.6 117.8 129.3 137.0 114.0 113.3
Oct. 127.2 141.6 120.5 154.7 119.1 113.7 117.8 129.1 135.0 114.1 113.4
Nov. 126.3 142.4 120.5 151.6 117.6 113.9 117.3 127.7 128.3 135.4 113.8 112.8
Dec. 126.6 142.4 120.5 148.4 118.7 114.0 117.4 127.3 137.3 113.5 111.7
2024 Jan. 126.4 143.7 119.7 150.2 118.1 114.4 117.6 127.6 5 138.2 113.6 111.7
Feb. 127.2 143.6 120.3 150.9 119.3 114.6 118.1 129.5 127.1 139.8 113.8 111.5
Mar. 128.0 143.5 120.9 150.5 120.7 114.9 118.6 127.3 141.1 113.9 111.9
Apr. 128.8 144.3 121.1 154.0 121.3 115.1 119.2 127.5 142.0 114.4 112.7
May 129.1 144.0 120.9 152.1 122.4 115.3 119.3 130.4 127.5 143.9 114.4 112.7
June 129.3 144.4 120.8 150.3 123.3 115.5 119.4 127.7 146.4 114.7 113.1
July 130.0 144.6 120.1 150.7 124.9 115.7 119.8 127.9 145.4 114.6 112.6
Aug. 129.8 144.6 120.0 148.5 125.1 115.8 119.7 131.4 128.2 139.0 114.6 112.2
Sep. 129.7 145.2 120.9 145.8 124.6 116.0 119.7 127.5 136.8 114.5 111.8
Oct. 130.2 146.3 121.5 146.4 124.8 116.2 120.2 127.7 139.1 114.8 112.5
Nov. 129.3 146.6 121.7 146.1 122.9 116.3 119.9 132.0 128.4 140.9 115.2 113.5
Dec. 130.2 146.9 122.1 146.2 124.2 116.5 120.5 128.3 ... ... ...
Annual percentage change
2021 4 +3.2 4+ 2.9 4+ 2.5 4+ 10.1 4+ 2.0 + 1.3 4 +3.1 4+ 8.8 + 9.6 + 6.9 + 5.2 +11.4
2022 +8.7 + 10.6 + 5.7 + 34.7 + 2.9 + 1.7 +6.9 +16.6 +29.8 +31.9 +13.5 +21.8
2023 +6.0 + 11.7 + 5.6 + 5.1 + 4.8 + 2.1 +5.9 + 8.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.6 – 6.5
2024 +2.5 + 2.8 + 1.5 – 3.2 + 4.3 + 2.2 +2.2 + 3.2 – 1.8 ... ... ...
2023 Feb. +9.3 + 18.0 + 7.2 + 21.6 + 4.4 + 2.0 +8.7 +15.5 +13.9 +22.9 + 6.6 + 3.1
Mar. +7.8 + 18.6 + 7.2 + 6.1 + 5.0 + 2.1 +7.4 + 7.5 + 5.8 + 3.3 – 3.1
Apr. +7.6 + 15.5 + 6.9 + 9.4 + 4.8 + 2.0 +7.2 + 5.2 – 1.3 + 1.7 – 5.6
May +6.3 + 13.6 + 6.2 + 5.0 + 4.4 + 2.0 +6.1 + 8.9 + 2.5 – 2.8 + 0.9 – 7.7
June +6.8 + 12.6 + 6.2 + 4.0 + 6.1 + 2.0 +6.4 + 1.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 8.6
July +6.5 + 10.7 + 5.5 + 3.9 + 6.7 + 2.1 +6.2 – 2.9 + 0.3 – 2.0 –10.8
Aug. +6.4 + 9.2 + 5.5 + 5.3 + 6.8 + 2.2 +6.1 + 6.5 – 7.6 – 1.5 – 3.6 –12.9
Sep. +4.3 + 8.1 + 4.9 – 0.8 + 4.7 + 2.2 +4.5 – 9.1 – 7.7 – 2.6 –11.0
Oct. +3.0 + 7.1 + 4.1 – 6.0 + 4.2 + 2.1 +3.8 – 7.3 –10.7 – 1.1 – 9.5
Nov. +2.3 + 6.6 + 3.6 – 7.3 + 3.4 + 2.1 +3.2 + 4.6 – 5.0 –10.8 – 1.2 – 7.2
Dec. +3.8 + 5.8 + 3.3 + 3.1 + 3.4 + 2.1 +3.7 – 5.1 – 9.7 – 1.4 – 7.0
2024 Jan. +3.1 + 5.1 + 2.8 – 3.0 + 3.8 + 2.1 +2.9 – 4.4 5– 7.7 – 1.3 – 5.9
Feb. +2.7 + 2.9 + 2.8 – 2.6 + 3.7 + 2.1 +2.5 + 3.2 – 4.1 – 5.9 – 1.1 – 4.9
Mar. +2.3 + 1.6 + 2.2 – 2.9 + 4.0 + 2.1 +2.2 – 2.9 – 2.4 – 1.0 – 3.6
Apr. +2.4 + 2.3 + 1.8 – 1.3 + 3.6 + 2.2 +2.2 – 3.3 + 0.1 – 0.2 – 1.7
May +2.8 + 2.1 + 1.3 – 1.2 + 4.7 + 2.2 +2.4 + 3.0 – 2.2 + 3.5 + 0.2 – 0.4
June +2.5 + 2.3 + 1.1 – 2.2 + 4.7 + 2.2 +2.2 – 1.6 + 3.5 + 0.6 + 0.7
July +2.6 + 2.4 + 1.1 – 1.9 + 4.4 + 2.2 +2.3 – 0.8 + 2.0 + 0.8 + 0.9
Aug. +2.0 + 2.6 + 0.7 – 5.1 + 4.4 + 2.0 +1.9 + 3.4 – 0.8 – 2.5 + 0.8 + 0.2
Sep. +1.8 + 2.6 + 0.7 – 7.5 + 4.4 + 2.1 +1.6 – 1.4 – 0.1 + 0.4 – 1.3
Oct. +2.4 + 3.3 + 0.8 – 5.4 + 4.8 + 2.2 +2.0 – 1.1 + 3.0 + 0.6 – 0.8
Nov. +2.4 + 2.9 + 1.0 – 3.6 + 4.5 + 2.1 +2.2 + 3.4 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 1.2 + 0.6
Dec. +2.8 + 3.2 + 1.3 – 1.5 + 4.6 + 2.2 +2.6 + 0.8 ... ... ...
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data
from the Federal Statistical Office.  1 The last data point is at times based on the Bun-
desbank’s own estimates.  2 Including alcoholic beverages and tobacco.  3 Excluding va-lue added tax.  4 Influenced by a temporary reduction of value added tax between July
and December 2020.  5 From January 2024 onwards, provisional figures.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
72•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
8. Households' income *
Gross wages and
salaries  1Net wages and
salaries  2Monetary social
benefits received  3 Mass income  4 Disposable income  5 Saving  6Saving
ratio  7
Period € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
change € billionAnnual
percentage
changeAs
percentage
2016 1,372.9 4.2 931.4 4.0 432.9 4.0 1,364.2 4.0 1,887.1 2.9 187.8 2.3 10.0
2017 1,435.3 4.5 971.8 4.3 447.9 3.5 1,419.7 4.1 1,955.0 3.6 201.2 7.2 10.3
2018 1,506.6 5.0 1,019.6 4.9 461.5 3.0 1,481.2 4.3 2,028.6 3.8 220.1 9.4 10.8
2019 1,572.6 4.4 1,069.5 4.9 479.2 3.8 1,548.7 4.6 2,080.4 2.6 215.3 – 2.2 10.3
2020 1,561.7 – 0.7 1,066.1 – 0.3 521.5 8.8 1,587.6 2.5 2,080.5 0.0 331.7 54.1 15.9
2021 1,620.5 3.8 1,111.3 4.2 531.5 1.9 1,642.8 3.5 2,144.2 3.1 303.3 – 8.6 14.1
2022 1,718.7 6.1 1,174.8 5.7 539.6 1.5 1,714.4 4.4 2,312.4 7.8 237.3 –21.8 10.3
2023 1,846.0 7.4 1,286.5 9.5 571.4 5.9 1,857.9 8.4 2,462.1 6.5 256.5 8.1 10.4
2023 Q2 445.1 7.8 303.3 10.0 139.9 6.2 443.2 8.8 609.1 8.0 61.9 16.2 10.2
Q3 457.0 7.7 323.9 9.3 145.0 5.0 469.0 7.9 619.9 5.8 58.1 12.5 9.4
Q4 511.7 6.9 357.9 9.2 143.5 6.0 501.3 8.2 630.2 4.8 62.3 7.5 9.9
2024 Q1 461.0 6.7 323.6 7.4 151.5 5.9 475.1 6.9 633.9 5.1 86.5 16.6 13.6
Q2 471.0 5.8 321.7 6.1 149.0 6.6 470.7 6.2 629.6 3.4 68.3 10.3 10.8
Q3 481.3 5.3 340.8 5.2 153.7 5.9 494.4 5.4 645.0 4.1 68.1 17.2 10.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2024.  * Households in-
cluding non-profit institutions serving households.  1 Residence concept.  2 After
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees'
contributions to the social security funds.  3 Social security benefits in cash from the
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, pension
payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social
benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges.  4 Net wages and salaries plusmonetary social benefits received.  5 Mass income plus operating surplus, mixed
income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of non-profit
institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax and consumption-related
taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in claims on company
pension funds.  6 Including the increase in claims on company pension funds.  7 Saving
as a percentage of disposable income.
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
Index of negotiated wages  1
On a monthly basis
On an hourly basis TotalTotal excluding
one-off payments Basic pay rates  2Memo item:
Wages and salaries
per employee  3
Period 2020=100Annual
percentage
change 2020=100Annual
percentage
change 2020=100Annual
percentage
change 2020=100Annual
percentage
change 2020=100Annual
percentage
change
2016 90.2 2.2 90.2 2.2 90.5 2.2 90.7 2.3 91.5 2.6
2017 92.3 2.3 92.2 2.3 92.6 2.3 92.9 2.4 94.0 2.8
2018 95.0 3.0 95.0 3.0 95.2 2.8 95.5 2.8 97.2 3.3
2019 97.8 2.9 97.8 3.0 98.0 2.9 98.0 2.6 100.2 3.1
2020 100.0 2.2 100.0 2.2 100.0 2.1 100.0 2.1 100.0 – 0.2
2021 101.5 1.5 101.5 1.5 101.6 1.6 101.5 1.5 103.3 3.3
2022 104.2 2.6 104.1 2.6 103.9 2.2 103.6 2.0 107.8 4.3
2023 108.3 4.0 108.3 4.0 106.7 2.7 106.3 2.6 114.8 6.4
2023 Q2 100.9 3.9 100.8 3.9 99.2 2.5 106.0 2.5 110.8 6.7
Q3 111.7 4.7 111.7 4.7 110.5 3.2 106.8 3.0 113.6 6.8
Q4 119.2 3.7 119.1 3.7 118.2 2.6 107.1 2.5 126.4 6.2
2024 Q1 108.0 6.3 108.0 6.3 101.9 3.1 108.5 3.0 114.8 6.1
Q2 104.0 3.1 104.0 3.1 103.5 4.3 110.6 4.3 116.8 5.4
Q3 121.6 8.8 121.6 8.8 116.4 5.4 112.8 5.6 119.3 5.1
2024 May 104.2 4.4 104.1 4.4 103.9 4.9 110.8 4.8 . .
June 103.9 0.2 103.8 0.2 103.4 4.0 110.9 4.1 . .
July 147.3 10.6 147.2 10.6 138.1 4.9 112.2 5.1 . .
Aug. 111.7 10.7 111.6 10.7 105.6 5.7 113.1 5.8 . .
Sep. 105.9 4.6 105.8 4.6 105.5 5.8 113.2 5.9 . .
Oct. 106.0 4.3 106.0 4.3 105.8 5.9 113.5 6.0 . .
Nov. 163.2 6.4 163.2 6.4 163.1 6.7 114.4 6.8 . .
1 Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports.  2 Excluding
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such as
annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13th monthly salary payment) andretirement provisions).  3 Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
November 2024.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
73•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
End of year/half
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which: of which: Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which:
PeriodTotal
assetsNon-
current
assetsIntangible
assetsTangible
assetsFinancial
assetsCurrent
assetsInven-
toriesTrade
receiv-
ables Cash  1 Equity Total Totalof which:
Financial
debt TotalFinancial
debtTrade
payables
Total (€ billion)
2020 2,850.0 1,797.3 607.6 733.1 335.1 1,052.7 243.6 225.9 240.5 811.5 2,038.5 1,181.5 746.4 857.0 304.4 196.1
2021 3,292.0 1,971.6 680.1 773.8 384.8 1,320.4 272.1 261.5 261.5 994.4 2,297.6 1,206.9 772.1 1,090.7 321.4 236.7
2022 3,431.6 2,057.0 713.5 804.3 414.0 1,374.6 326.2 268.3 244.3 1,133.2 2,298.4 1,195.7 760.2 1,102.8 332.3 273.3
2023 3,320.5 2,038.7 699.2 823.2 385.5 1,281.8 325.2 259.9 251.4 1,145.4 2,175.1 1,146.3 763.3 1,028.8 334.1 261.7
2022 H2 3,431.6 2,057.0 713.5 804.3 414.0 1,374.6 326.2 268.3 244.3 1,133.2 2,298.4 1,195.7 760.2 1,102.8 332.3 273.3
2023 H1 3,322.4 2,009.5 699.5 799.0 377.0 1,312.9 343.9 263.7 235.2 1,134.0 2,188.3 1,130.8 748.9 1,057.5 329.7 259.9
H2 3,320.5 2,038.7 699.2 823.2 385.5 1,281.8 325.2 259.9 251.4 1,145.4 2,175.1 1,146.3 763.3 1,028.8 334.1 261.7
p 2024 H1 3,383.9 2,085.6 712.1 846.6 390.2 1,298.3 350.4 267.1 233.7 1,153.3 2,230.6 1,169.5 793.0 1,061.1 344.1 254.8
As a percentage of total assets
2020 100.0 63.1 21.3 25.7 11.8 36.9 8.6 7.9 8.4 28.5 71.5 41.5 26.2 30.1 10.7 6.9
2021 100.0 59.9 20.7 23.5 11.7 40.1 8.3 7.9 7.9 30.2 69.8 36.7 23.5 33.1 9.8 7.2
2022 100.0 59.9 20.8 23.4 12.1 40.1 9.5 7.8 7.1 33.0 67.0 34.8 22.2 32.1 9.7 8.0
2023 100.0 61.4 21.1 24.8 11.6 38.6 9.8 7.8 7.6 34.5 65.5 34.5 23.0 31.0 10.1 7.9
2022 H2 100.0 59.9 20.8 23.4 12.1 40.1 9.5 7.8 7.1 33.0 67.0 34.8 22.2 32.1 9.7 8.0
2023 H1 100.0 60.5 21.1 24.1 11.4 39.5 10.4 7.9 7.1 34.1 65.9 34.0 22.5 31.8 9.9 7.8
H2 100.0 61.4 21.1 24.8 11.6 38.6 9.8 7.8 7.6 34.5 65.5 34.5 23.0 31.0 10.1 7.9
p 2024 H1 100.0 61.6 21.0 25.0 11.5 38.4 10.4 7.9 6.9 34.1 65.9 34.6 23.4 31.4 10.2 7.5
Groups with a focus on the production sector (€ billion) 2
2020 2,265.0 1,354.9 399.1 543.5 320.0 910.1 228.7 179.5 187.9 636.3 1,628.8 904.7 537.0 724.0 267.3 149.8
2021 2,626.3 1,479.3 441.7 573.9 363.5 1,147.0 254.4 206.3 204.2 764.7 1,861.6 918.5 548.5 943.2 285.9 184.0
2022 2,730.8 1,538.3 461.5 591.7 392.2 1,192.4 307.7 209.1 186.5 879.7 1,851.1 912.7 534.3 938.4 291.6 215.2
2023 2,620.2 1,512.9 446.6 604.5 363.1 1,107.3 305.2 202.2 203.4 888.8 1,731.4 859.8 536.9 871.6 294.9 206.6
2022 H2 2,730.8 1,538.3 461.5 591.7 392.2 1,192.4 307.7 209.1 186.5 879.7 1,851.1 912.7 534.3 938.4 291.6 215.2
2023 H1 2,651.0 1,504.1 460.3 588.8 352.3 1,146.8 326.4 210.9 184.5 892.6 1,758.4 854.6 528.8 903.8 285.2 210.1
H2 2,620.2 1,512.9 446.6 604.5 363.1 1,107.3 305.2 202.2 203.4 888.8 1,731.4 859.8 536.9 871.6 294.9 206.6
p 2024 H1 2,672.0 1,551.4 454.8 625.0 366.5 1,120.6 329.9 208.4 187.5 906.1 1,765.9 878.5 561.6 887.4 300.9 201.1
As a percentage of total assets
2020 100.0 59.8 17.6 24.0 14.1 40.2 10.1 7.9 8.3 28.1 71.9 39.9 23.7 32.0 11.8 6.6
2021 100.0 56.3 16.8 21.9 13.8 43.7 9.7 7.9 7.8 29.1 70.9 35.0 20.9 35.9 10.9 7.0
2022 100.0 56.3 16.9 21.7 14.4 43.7 11.3 7.7 6.8 32.2 67.8 33.4 19.6 34.4 10.7 7.9
2023 100.0 57.7 17.0 23.1 13.9 42.3 11.7 7.7 7.8 33.9 66.1 32.8 20.5 33.3 11.3 7.9
2022 H2 100.0 56.3 16.9 21.7 14.4 43.7 11.3 7.7 6.8 32.2 67.8 33.4 19.6 34.4 10.7 7.9
2023 H1 100.0 56.7 17.4 22.2 13.3 43.3 12.3 8.0 7.0 33.7 66.3 32.2 20.0 34.1 10.8 7.9
H2 100.0 57.7 17.0 23.1 13.9 42.3 11.7 7.7 7.8 33.9 66.1 32.8 20.5 33.3 11.3 7.9
p 2024 H1 100.0 58.1 17.0 23.4 13.7 41.9 12.4 7.8 7.0 33.9 66.1 32.9 21.0 33.2 11.3 7.5
Groups with a focus on the services sector (€ billion)  
2020 585.0 442.4 208.5 189.6 15.1 142.6 14.9 46.4 52.6 175.3 409.7 276.7 209.4 133.0 37.1 46.3
2021 665.7 492.2 238.5 200.0 21.3 173.5 17.7 55.2 57.3 229.7 436.0 288.4 223.6 147.6 35.5 52.6
2022 700.9 518.7 251.9 212.5 21.8 182.2 18.5 59.1 57.8 253.5 447.3 283.0 225.9 164.3 40.7 58.1
2023 700.3 525.8 252.6 218.7 22.3 174.5 20.0 57.7 48.0 256.6 443.7 286.5 226.5 157.2 39.1 55.2
2022 H2 700.9 518.7 251.9 212.5 21.8 182.2 18.5 59.1 57.8 253.5 447.3 283.0 225.9 164.3 40.7 58.1
2023 H1 671.4 505.4 239.2 210.2 24.7 166.0 17.4 52.9 50.7 241.5 429.9 276.2 220.1 153.8 44.6 49.9
H2 700.3 525.8 252.6 218.7 22.3 174.5 20.0 57.7 48.0 256.6 443.7 286.5 226.5 157.2 39.1 55.2
p 2024 H1 711.9 534.1 257.2 221.6 23.6 177.8 20.5 58.6 46.1 247.1 464.8 291.1 231.3 173.7 43.2 53.8
As a percentage of total assets
2020 100.0 75.6 35.6 32.4 2.6 24.4 2.6 7.9 9.0 30.0 70.0 47.3 35.8 22.7 6.3 7.9
2021 100.0 73.9 35.8 30.0 3.2 26.1 2.7 8.3 8.6 34.5 65.5 43.3 33.6 22.2 5.3 7.9
2022 100.0 74.0 36.0 30.3 3.1 26.0 2.6 8.4 8.3 36.2 63.8 40.4 32.2 23.5 5.8 8.3
2023 100.0 75.1 36.1 31.2 3.2 24.9 2.9 8.2 6.9 36.6 63.4 40.9 32.3 22.4 5.6 7.9
2022 H2 100.0 74.0 36.0 30.3 3.1 26.0 2.6 8.4 8.3 36.2 63.8 40.4 32.2 23.5 5.8 8.3
2023 H1 100.0 75.3 35.6 31.3 3.7 24.7 2.6 7.9 7.6 36.0 64.0 41.1 32.8 22.9 6.6 7.4
H2 100.0 75.1 36.1 31.2 3.2 24.9 2.9 8.2 6.9 36.6 63.4 40.9 32.3 22.4 5.6 7.9
p 2024 H1 100.0 75.0 36.1 31.1 3.3 25.0 2.9 8.2 6.5 34.7 65.3 40.9 32.5 24.4 6.1 7.6
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Including cash equivalents.  2 Includ-
ing groups in agriculture and forestry.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
74•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
EBITDA  1
as a percentage of revenuesEBIT  2
as a percentage of revenues
Distribution  3 Distribution  3
Revenues EBITDA  1Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartile EBIT  2Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartile
Period € billion  4Annual
per-
centage
change  5€ billion  4Annual
per-
centage
change  5%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  5% % % € billion  4Annual
per-
centage
change  5%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  5% % %
Total
2016 1,624.3 – 0.4 214.4 7.8 13.2 1.0 6.7 11.4 17.9 111.7 9.0 6.9 0.5 2.6 6.7 12.0
2017 1,719.3 5.1 243.4 14.6 14.2 1.2 7.0 11.0 18.0 141.9 33.3 8.3 1.8 2.5 6.8 12.1
6 2018 1,706.8 0.7 232.8 – 0.9 13.6 – 0.2 6.1 10.6 17.8 129.2 – 6.3 7.6 – 0.6 2.1 6.5 11.9
2019 1,764.6 2.6 233.6 0.4 13.2 – 0.3 6.9 12.2 19.2 105.5 – 17.9 6.0 – 1.5 1.6 5.8 11.8
2020 1,632.8 – 8.8 213.6 – 7.7 13.1 0.2 6.5 11.5 17.9 52.1 – 41.0 3.2 – 2.1 – 0.8 4.9 10.5
2021 1,994.7 20.4 297.7 37.7 14.9 1.9 7.8 13.4 19.9 161.5 212.6 8.1 5.0 2.9 8.2 12.2
2022 2,431.3 20.8 324.8 7.8 13.4 – 1.6 6.4 11.8 18.4 170.0 3.5 7.0 – 1.2 1.6 6.6 12.4
2023 2,238.3 – 7.7 323.6 0.4 14.5 1.2 6.1 12.2 17.9 170.0 0.9 7.6 0.7 1.8 6.6 11.5
2019 H2 903.7 2.4 121.3 4.8 13.4 0.3 6.6 11.8 20.0 52.0 – 11.4 5.8 – 0.9 0.8 6.1 12.5
2020 H1 744.5 – 14.4 78.2 – 34.1 10.5 – 3.0 4.8 9.9 16.7 7.9 – 88.0 1.1 – 5.3 – 2.1 3.5 8.8
H2 888.4 – 3.3 135.4 17.1 15.2 2.8 7.6 13.2 19.8 44.2 8.6 5.0 0.7 1.7 6.5 11.6
2021 H1 920.0 20.3 151.5 87.2 16.5 5.9 7.4 12.6 19.5 84.5 . 9.2 8.3 2.3 7.8 12.2
H2 1,075.6 20.4 146.4 8.1 13.6 – 1.6 7.9 13.2 20.8 77.0 73.1 7.2 2.2 2.9 7.7 13.4
2022 H1 1,149.7 23.5 161.0 4.8 14.0 – 2.5 6.1 11.5 18.4 84.9 – 1.6 7.4 – 1.9 1.6 6.4 11.8
H2 1,283.3 18.5 163.9 11.0 12.8 – 0.9 5.9 11.6 18.9 85.2 9.1 6.6 – 0.6 1.7 6.7 12.9
2023 H1 1,112.0 – 3.0 172.0 7.8 15.5 1.6 6.4 10.8 17.5 98.1 16.9 8.8 1.5 1.2 6.5 10.8
H2 1,127.6 – 12.0 151.7 – 6.8 13.5 0.8 6.3 12.5 19.8 71.9 – 15.0 6.4 – 0.2 1.2 7.0 13.0
p 2024 H1 1,075.5 – 3.7 160.6 – 6.1 14.9 – 0.4 6.1 11.0 16.7 89.7 – 8.4 8.3 – 0.4 1.6 5.9 10.3
Groups with a focus on the production sector 7
2016 1,295.9 – 0.8 161.9 6.3 12.5 0.8 6.5 10.6 16.0 84.8 4.2 6.5 0.3 2.8 6.3 10.5
2017 1,395.9 5.5 187.5 16.6 13.4 1.3 7.1 11.0 15.8 112.5 40.6 8.1 2.0 3.2 6.7 10.4
6 2018 1,367.7 1.0 175.7 – 1.5 12.9 – 0.3 6.9 10.7 16.0 100.7 – 7.1 7.4 – 0.6 2.8 6.9 11.4
2019 1,410.9 2.0 168.1 – 4.4 11.9 – 0.8 6.9 11.3 16.6 76.3 – 23.8 5.4 – 1.8 1.4 5.7 10.1
2020 1,285.2 – 9.4 143.6 – 8.6 11.2 0.1 5.7 10.6 16.5 29.1 – 48.1 2.3 – 2.3 – 0.7 4.3 9.8
2021 1,585.8 22.4 208.9 45.9 13.2 2.1 7.9 12.8 17.9 118.6 325.8 7.5 5.4 2.8 7.8 11.1
2022 1,957.4 21.7 222.9 4.7 11.4 – 1.8 6.9 11.3 16.4 116.3 – 4.7 5.9 – 1.6 1.8 6.6 10.7
2023 1,784.0 – 8.2 233.7 5.7 13.1 1.7 7.5 11.4 16.1 124.2 7.6 7.0 1.0 2.2 6.6 11.4
2019 H2 721.0 1.7 84.8 0.3 11.8 – 0.2 6.1 10.8 16.9 34.4 – 19.7 4.8 – 1.3 0.6 5.2 11.1
2020 H1 580.6 – 16.0 49.0 – 42.4 8.4 – 3.8 4.4 8.8 14.9 0.2 – 101.7 0.0 – 6.2 – 2.1 3.1 7.8
H2 704.6 – 3.0 94.6 25.4 13.4 3.4 7.0 12.1 18.6 28.9 19.6 4.1 1.1 0.3 6.0 10.4
2021 H1 731.9 24.0 111.2 126.9 15.2 6.9 8.2 12.6 18.6 66.7 . 9.1 9.3 2.9 7.9 12.1
H2 854.2 21.1 97.7 3.8 11.4 – 1.9 7.8 12.3 17.5 51.9 80.8 6.1 2.0 2.6 7.0 11.5
2022 H1 923.4 23.8 110.9 – 2.5 12.0 – 3.3 7.7 11.5 16.3 59.0 – 14.2 6.4 – 2.8 2.3 6.4 10.4
H2 1,035.8 19.9 112.2 13.1 10.8 – 0.7 5.9 10.8 16.7 57.4 7.7 5.5 – 0.6 1.3 6.5 11.4
2023 H1 894.9 – 2.9 129.0 16.7 14.4 2.4 7.1 11.7 16.3 76.7 30.5 8.6 2.2 2.1 6.7 10.7
H2 890.0 – 13.0 104.9 – 5.0 11.8 1.0 6.7 12.4 17.4 47.5 – 16.0 5.3 – 0.2 1.8 6.6 12.0
p 2024 H1 838.4 – 5.4 119.9 – 6.1 14.3 – 0.1 7.4 11.3 16.7 71.2 – 6.7 8.5 – 0.1 2.7 6.4 10.4
Groups with a focus on the services sector
2016 328.4 1.3 52.5 12.8 16.0 1.6 6.8 13.4 25.1 26.9 24.4 8.2 1.5 2.3 8.2 15.3
2017 323.4 3.5 55.9 8.3 17.3 0.8 6.8 11.5 23.0 29.4 11.4 9.1 0.6 2.1 7.2 15.1
6 2018 339.2 – 0.6 57.1 1.3 16.8 0.3 5.5 10.5 24.7 28.5 – 3.5 8.4 – 0.3 1.4 5.8 16.6
2019 353.7 4.8 65.4 15.2 18.5 1.7 6.9 13.7 24.5 29.2 2.8 8.3 – 0.2 2.4 6.2 16.2
2020 347.6 – 6.1 70.0 – 5.4 20.1 0.1 6.9 13.3 22.1 23.0 – 22.1 6.6 – 1.4 – 1.2 6.5 12.2
2021 408.9 13.0 88.8 21.6 21.7 1.6 7.6 15.0 24.0 42.8 79.7 10.5 3.9 3.0 9.2 15.6
2022 473.9 17.4 101.9 15.3 21.5 – 0.4 5.2 13.1 22.8 53.8 26.4 11.3 0.8 1.0 6.9 14.4
2023 454.4 – 5.6 89.9 – 11.2 19.8 – 1.3 5.6 12.9 22.2 45.8 – 13.7 10.1 – 1.0 1.6 6.8 12.9
2019 H2 182.7 5.5 36.5 16.9 20.0 1.9 7.1 15.1 24.4 17.7 10.9 9.7 0.5 1.8 8.2 16.3
2020 H1 163.9 – 8.1 29.2 – 9.4 17.8 – 0.3 5.6 10.8 21.2 7.7 – 36.4 4.7 – 2.1 – 2.2 4.3 10.9
H2 183.8 – 4.2 40.8 – 2.2 22.2 0.4 8.9 14.7 23.3 15.3 – 12.8 8.3 – 0.9 2.6 7.5 13.3
2021 H1 188.1 7.7 40.3 26.1 21.5 3.1 6.9 12.6 24.5 17.8 119.9 9.5 4.8 0.9 6.9 13.6
H2 221.4 17.9 48.7 18.2 22.0 0.1 9.4 16.5 24.7 25.1 59.1 11.3 3.0 3.8 9.5 17.7
2022 H1 226.3 22.0 50.1 25.3 22.2 0.6 4.6 11.6 20.9 25.9 46.4 11.5 1.9 – 0.5 6.3 13.5
H2 247.6 13.4 51.8 7.0 20.9 – 1.3 5.2 14.1 24.0 27.8 12.1 11.2 – 0.1 2.2 7.5 15.4
2023 H1 217.1 – 3.6 43.1 – 11.8 19.8 – 1.9 4.7 9.6 19.2 21.4 – 14.4 9.9 – 1.3 – 2.2 4.2 12.0
H2 237.6 – 7.5 46.8 – 10.7 19.7 – 0.7 5.9 14.4 23.3 24.4 – 13.0 10.3 – 0.7 0.9 7.3 16.1
p 2024 H1 237.1 2.9 40.7 – 6.1 17.2 – 1.7 5.3 8.5 16.8 18.5 – 14.2 7.8 – 1.6 – 0.4 3.6 9.3
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-
cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Earnings before interest, taxes, de-
preciation and amortisation.  2 Earnings before interest and taxes.  3 Quantile data are
based on the groups' unweighted return on sales.  4 Annual figures do not alwaysmatch the sum of the two half-year figures. See Quality report on consolidated financial
statement statistics, p. 3.  5 Adjusted for substantial changes in the basis of con-
solidation of large groups and in the reporting sample. See Quality report on consolid-
ated financial statement statistics, p. 6.  6 From 2018 onwards: significant changes in
IFRS standards, impairing comparability with previous periods.  7 Including groups in
agriculture and forestry.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
75•
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
€ million
2024 2024
Item 2021 2022 2023 Q1 Q2 Q3 August September October  p
I.Current Account +326,013 + 1,551 +248,072 +97,038 +99,480 +139,045 +38,819 +51,462 +31,980
1.Goods
Receipts 2,430,145 2,872,731 2,816,097 696,311 721,909 715,486 220,216 241,765 253,900
Expenditure  2,139,171 2,918,280 2,559,454 593,831 623,053 615,673 193,777 208,183 221,198
Balance +290,974 –45,549 +256,643 +102,480 +98,856 +99,813 +26,439 +33,582 +32,701
2.Services
Receipts 1,090,675 1,337,450 1,380,606 340,521 387,397 397,440 131,878 127,306 123,297
Expenditure  979,997 1,173,638 1,257,271 317,692 327,729 329,327 110,325 105,133 112,150
Balance +110,679 +163,812 +123,335 +22,829 +59,668 +68,112 +21,553 +22,174 +11,148
3.Primary income
Receipts 901,032 1,094,260 1,249,525 299,920 354,011 324,841 103,144 114,597 103,952
Expenditure  809,492 1,037,751 1,215,364 286,366 376,387 313,601 98,618 105,542 102,902
Balance +91,539 +56,508 +34,161 +13,554 –22,376 +11,240 + 4,526 + 9,056 + 1,050
4.Secondary income
Receipts 158,994 172,046 184,776 44,369 49,221 40,623 12,786 13,694 15,669
Expenditure  326,173 345,267 350,843 86,194 85,889 80,744 26,485 27,043 28,588
Balance –167,180 –173,221 –166,067 –41,825 –36,668 –40,120 –13,699 –13,349 –12,919
II.Capital account +47,691 +148,046 +39,667 –12,701 + 3,333 + 2,786 + 3,404 – 319 + 2,449
III.Financial account  1 +375,573 +87,745 +326,217 +110,599 +131,244 +163,155 +27,594 +74,592 +22,953
1.Direct investment +435,793 +264,678 +35,005 +90,723 +66,292 +23,046 – 7,443 + 9,576 – 2,262
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  +404,445 +121,167 –328,713 +140,132 –51,253 +45,420 + 3,712 +20,860 +10,011
By non-resident units of
the euro area  –31,348 –143,511 –363,718 +49,409 –117,545 +22,374 +11,155 +11,283 +12,273
2.Portfolio investment +261,894 –250,305 –87,061 –22,134 –81,151 +12,394 + 686 –10,683 +23,900
By resident units abroad 
the euro area  +806,786 –157,309 +469,982 +167,116 +180,105 +157,270 +37,701 +64,052 +67,714
Equity and
investment fund shares +368,161 –158,161 +89,935 +28,308 +61,264 +27,168 + 6,518 + 5,576 +34,921
Short-term
debt securities  +119,001 –105,244 +105,389 +11,013 + 6,263 +43,599 + 2,553 +23,930 – 1,714
Long-term
debt securities  +319,624 +106,097 +274,658 +127,795 +112,578 +86,503 +28,630 +34,547 +34,507
By non-resident units of 
the euro area  +544,892 +92,996 +557,042 +189,251 +261,255 +144,876 +37,015 +74,735 +43,814
Equity and
investment fund shares +654,501 +62,299 +157,329 +29,215 +127,576 +94,154 +38,663 +15,100 +29,062
Short-term
debt securities  +45,581 –67,871 –12,865 –28,248 + 2,575 – 2,091 –14,351 + 4,837 + 7,838
Long-term
debt securities  –155,189 +98,569 +412,579 +188,284 +131,104 +52,813 +12,703 +54,798 + 6,915
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options +62,756 +109,274 +14,166 +13,038 +12,235 – 7,400 + 1,191 – 5,417 +20,110
4.Other investment –515,226 –53,785 +376,524 +27,818 +130,130 +138,990 +36,165 +78,754 –18,561
Eurosystem –443,446 +172,312 +318,507 +76,666 –19,471 +29,076 – 1,272 +16,474 – 4,970
General government –77,043 –49,433 + 1,060 – 3,174 + 876 –25,872 – 7,277 – 3,155 + 810
MFIs  2 –115,831 –304,956 +162,625 +34,633 +116,609 +143,096 +70,105 +39,311 – 7,662
Enterprises and households +121,095 +128,291 –105,669 –80,307 +32,117 – 7,311 –25,391 +26,124 – 6,739
5.Reserve assets +130,357 +17,884 –12,416 + 1,155 + 3,738 – 3,875 – 3,007 + 2,361 – 234
IV.Net errors and omissions + 1,869 –61,852 +38,478 +26,262 +28,430 +21,324 –14,629 +23,449 –11,475
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Increase: + / decrease: -.2 Excluding the Eurosystem.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
76•
XII. External sector
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Current Account Financial account  3
Goods 
Zeit Total Totalof which: 
Supplementary
trade items  1 ServicesPrimary
incomeSecondary
incomeBalance of
capital
account  2 Totalof which: 
Reserve
assetsErrors
and
omissions  4
2009 + 144,787 + 136,636 – 10,761 – 16,962 + 55,894 – 30,781 – 1,798 + 111,873 + 8,648 – 31,117
2010 + 150,210 + 159,328 – 8,801 – 25,147 + 52,346 – 36,317 + 19 + 73,036 + 1,613 – 77,192
2011 + 172,827 + 164,171 – 8,902 – 30,158 + 70,336 – 31,523 – 1,070 + 101,101 + 2,836 – 70,657
2012 + 201,277 + 200,916 – 10,420 – 31,425 + 67,297 – 35,511 – 2,167 + 131,252 + 1,297 – 67,858
2013 + 192,346 + 199,951 – 17,770 – 34,257 + 66,870 – 40,218 – 2,970 + 200,883 + 838 + 11,507
2014 + 215,932 + 218,515 – 15,863 – 22,941 + 61,801 – 41,443 + 336 + 231,400 – 2,564 + 15,132
2015 + 250,088 + 245,054 – 18,813 – 16,236 + 60,040 – 38,770 – 1,769 + 227,420 – 2,213 – 20,899
2016 + 284,662 + 250,397 – 21,830 – 18,346 + 90,869 – 38,259 – 1,345 + 269,282 + 1,686 – 14,034
2017 + 268,729 + 257,041 – 12,757 – 21,212 + 83,864 – 50,964 – 6,479 + 274,766 – 1,269 + 12,515
2018 + 289,187 + 218,739 – 27,726 – 14,010 + 134,180 – 49,722 – 3,602 + 261,115 + 392 – 24,470
2019 + 278,477 + 213,201 – 39,862 – 14,443 + 130,094 – 50,375 – 4,907 + 200,831 – 544 – 72,739
2020 + 218,031 + 177,742 – 21,461 + 6,633 + 87,061 – 53,406 – 10,520 + 168,954 – 51 – 38,557
2021 + 254,580 + 188,036 – 5,970 + 1,613 + 124,430 – 59,499 – 3,463 + 206,797 + 31,892 – 44,320
2022 + 174,507 + 134,785 + 18,630 – 35,984 + 143,193 – 67,486 – 20,290 + 199,405 + 4,426 + 45,188
2023 + 243,122 + 225,511 – 33,721 – 64,577 + 146,423 – 64,234 – 26,636 + 250,153 + 884 + 33,667
2021 Q4 + 63,458 + 39,847 + 2,546 – 2,883 + 43,025 – 16,531 + 230 + 53,018 + 250 – 10,669
2022 Q1 + 57,805 + 37,750 + 5,928 + 723 + 36,785 – 17,453 – 3,787 + 71,950 + 2,200 + 17,932
Q2 + 28,650 + 30,261 + 8,443 – 6,455 + 18,032 – 13,188 – 4,516 + 61,543 + 597 + 37,410
Q3 + 31,130 + 31,578 + 7,336 – 22,381 + 39,388 – 17,455 – 6,442 – 19,471 + 784 – 44,159
Q4 + 56,921 + 35,196 – 3,078 – 7,871 + 48,987 – 19,391 – 5,544 + 85,382 + 845 + 34,005
2023 Q1 + 63,450 + 53,371 – 7,384 – 9,541 + 38,396 – 18,776 – 13,931 + 81,336 + 224 + 31,817
Q2 + 44,747 + 53,260 – 5,974 – 17,082 + 18,793 – 10,225 – 4,074 + 29,749 + 1,096 – 10,924
Q3 + 58,399 + 57,016 – 9,154 – 25,066 + 42,254 – 15,805 – 3,906 + 46,047 – 790 – 8,446
Q4 + 76,526 + 61,864 – 11,209 – 12,889 + 46,979 – 19,428 – 4,725 + 93,021 + 355 + 21,220
2024 Q1 + 76,289 + 70,434 – 8,065 – 12,166 + 37,078 – 19,058 – 8,679 + 46,880 + 378 – 20,729
Q2 + 58,879 + 68,008 – 9,870 – 20,366 + 20,480 – 9,242 – 773 + 48,342 + 746 – 9,764
Q3 + 53,848 + 55,769 – 9,705 – 28,498 + 41,070 – 14,493 – 3,704 + 94,777 – 890 + 44,632
2022 June + 12,230 + 12,152 + 1,124 – 3,031 + 9,511 – 6,403 – 598 + 39,962 + 353 + 28,330
July + 9,969 + 10,616 + 1,904 – 6,046 + 12,200 – 6,800 – 3,180 – 21,182 – 484 – 27,971
Aug. + 6,312 + 8,024 + 4,079 – 9,647 + 13,948 – 6,012 – 1,252 + 23,448 + 81 + 18,389
Sep. + 14,849 + 12,938 + 1,353 – 6,687 + 13,240 – 4,643 – 2,010 – 21,737 + 1,187 – 34,576
Oct. + 10,678 + 7,214 – 206 – 5,692 + 14,682 – 5,527 – 1,623 + 43,079 + 672 + 34,024
Nov. + 21,021 + 13,925 – 2,083 – 2,170 + 15,326 – 6,060 – 2,080 – 3,629 + 425 – 22,569
Dec. + 25,223 + 14,057 – 788 – 10 + 18,979 – 7,803 – 1,842 + 45,932 – 252 + 22,550
2023 Jan. + 14,245 + 10,296 – 1,868 – 1,953 + 13,078 – 7,176 – 5,965 – 3,226 – 341 – 11,506
Feb. + 21,067 + 18,333 – 1,822 – 3,185 + 11,062 – 5,143 – 1,918 + 29,475 + 143 + 10,325
Mar. + 28,137 + 24,741 – 3,694 – 4,403 + 14,256 – 6,457 – 6,048 + 55,087 + 423 + 32,998
Apr. + 18,250 + 14,901 – 1,630 – 3,807 + 12,170 – 5,014 – 343 – 32,083 + 88 – 49,990
May + 5,905 + 16,499 – 696 – 6,417 – 3,771 – 406 – 2,415 + 5,084 + 45 + 1,594
June + 20,593 + 21,861 – 3,648 – 6,858 + 10,395 – 4,805 – 1,316 + 56,748 + 962 + 37,471
July + 16,495 + 18,106 – 4,531 – 8,018 + 12,254 – 5,847 – 4,669 + 2,762 – 118 – 9,064
Aug. + 18,406 + 18,285 – 1,077 – 10,616 + 15,803 – 5,066 – 691 + 38,044 – 107 + 20,329
Sep. + 23,498 + 20,625 – 3,545 – 6,431 + 14,197 – 4,892 + 1,454 + 5,241 – 566 – 19,711
Oct. + 18,588 + 21,532 – 1,879 – 10,681 + 14,007 – 6,269 – 3,257 + 23,280 + 858 + 7,948
Nov. + 28,874 + 23,813 – 4,893 – 3,590 + 14,896 – 6,245 – 3,822 + 35,435 + 65 + 10,383
Dec. + 29,064 + 16,519 – 4,437 + 1,382 + 18,077 – 6,914 + 2,354 + 34,307 – 569 + 2,889
2024 Jan. + 21,132 + 22,382 – 1,801 – 4,231 + 12,511 – 9,530 – 6,807 + 7,788 – 249 – 6,536
Feb. + 25,764 + 23,893 – 3,355 – 3,638 + 10,218 – 4,709 – 1,995 + 6,760 + 1,193 – 17,009
Mar. + 29,392 + 24,159 – 2,910 – 4,297 + 14,348 – 4,818 + 123 + 32,332 – 566 + 2,816
Apr. + 23,151 + 23,307 – 3,172 – 5,392 + 8,384 – 3,148 – 2,028 + 7,607 – 317 – 13,516
May + 16,092 + 24,054 – 2,393 – 8,088 + 1,655 – 1,528 – 1,372 + 24,538 + 156 + 9,818
June + 19,635 + 20,647 – 4,304 – 6,886 + 10,441 – 4,567 + 2,628 + 16,196 + 908 – 6,066
July + 16,507 + 19,918 – 2,662 – 10,346 + 12,350 – 5,415 – 2,404 + 43,155 – 1,194 + 29,053
Aug. + 16,035 + 17,449 – 3,514 – 10,743 + 14,296 – 4,967 + 711 + 10,078 – 552 – 6,668
Sep. + 21,307 + 18,403 – 3,529 – 7,409 + 14,424 – 4,111 – 2,010 + 41,544 + 855 + 22,247
r Oct. + 13,740 + 15,544 – 1,049 – 11,257 + 15,295 – 5,842 – 2,802 + 4,552 – 1,367 – 6,386
p Nov. + 24,142 + 19,479 – 3,955 – 5,977 + 16,574 – 5,934 – 1,398 + 26,373 + 1,671 + 3,629
1 For example, warehouse transactions for the account of residents, deductions of
goods returned and deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for
processing.  2 Including net acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets.3 Net lending: + / net borrowing: -.  4 Statistical errors and omissions resulting from the
difference between the balance on the financial account and the balances on the
current account and the capital account.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
77•
XII. External sector
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
€ million
2024
Group of countries/country 
2021 2022 
2023 June July Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov.
All countries  1 Exports 1,371,397 1,594,034 1,575,294 128,423 133,566 120,537 130,190 132,644 131,414
Imports 1,195,499 1,505,434 1,356,713 107,170 113,927 102,522 111,821 117,922 110,969
Balance +175,898 +88,600 +218,581 +21,253 +19,639 +18,015 +18,369 +14,722 +20,445
   I. European countries Exports 941,795 1,091,554 1,072,718 86,894 88,760 80,408 88,669 91,605 89,407
Imports 795,136 973,063 873,457 69,883 72,913 63,538 70,756 75,012 70,674
Balance +146,658 +118,492 +199,262 +17,012 +15,847 +16,870 +17,913 +16,593 +18,733
      1. EU Member States (27) Exports 743,373 878,642 859,615 69,716 70,454 63,698 70,696 73,108 69,851
Imports 629,513 737,668 711,287 57,126 59,057 51,636 57,898 61,002 57,078
Balance +113,861 +140,974 +148,329 +12,590 +11,397 +12,062 +12,798 +12,106 +12,774
          Euro area (20)       Exports 518,043 617,068 603,702 48,649 49,932 43,162 48,963 50,591 48,100
          countries Imports 431,697 506,865 474,272 38,079 40,499 33,607 37,846 40,072 36,813
Balance +86,345 +110,203 +129,430 +10,570 + 9,434 + 9,555 +11,117 +10,519 +11,287
          of which:
               Austria Exports 72,385 90,270 80,379 6,152 6,499 5,959 6,366 6,750 6,567
  Imports 47,492 58,137 53,735 4,288 4,686 3,755 4,454 4,623 4,251
Balance +24,893 +32,134 +26,644 + 1,863 + 1,814 + 2,204 + 1,912 + 2,128 + 2,316
               Belgium and Exports 58,080 70,933 67,504 5,742 5,512 5,052 5,221 5,492 5,170
               Luxembourg Imports 55,726 67,071 56,171 4,259 4,624 4,050 4,533 4,839 4,007
Balance + 2,354 + 3,861 +11,333 + 1,483 + 888 + 1,002 + 688 + 652 + 1,163
               France Exports 102,741 118,168 119,850 9,507 9,940 7,999 9,641 9,919 9,147
  Imports 61,921 69,969 69,774 5,686 5,726 4,914 5,472 6,243 5,497
Balance +40,820 +48,198 +50,076 + 3,821 + 4,214 + 3,085 + 4,169 + 3,676 + 3,649
               Italy Exports 75,526 89,191 85,333 6,769 7,057 5,288 6,971 7,122 6,629
  Imports 65,389 73,177 71,239 5,738 6,307 4,550 5,741 6,008 5,616
Balance +10,137 +16,014 +14,094 + 1,031 + 750 + 738 + 1,230 + 1,113 + 1,013
               Netherlands Exports 93,101 112,261 112,046 9,099 9,314 8,425 9,097 9,191 9,246
  Imports 96,562 114,998 102,778 7,836 8,256 7,629 8,014 7,857 8,057
Balance – 3,461 – 2,737 + 9,268 + 1,263 + 1,057 + 796 + 1,083 + 1,334 + 1,189
               Spain  Exports 43,932 49,935 54,003 4,511 4,671 3,752 4,484 4,755 4,347
  Imports 34,180 37,756 38,722 3,421 3,148 2,480 3,018 3,079 3,106
Balance + 9,752 +12,178 +15,280 + 1,090 + 1,523 + 1,272 + 1,466 + 1,676 + 1,241
          Other EU Member  Exports 225,331 261,574 255,914 21,067 20,522 20,536 21,734 22,516 21,751
          States  Imports 197,815 230,803 237,015 19,047 18,559 18,029 20,053 20,930 20,264
Balance +27,515 +30,772 +18,899 + 2,020 + 1,963 + 2,507 + 1,681 + 1,587 + 1,487
      2. Other European Exports 198,421 212,912 213,103 17,178 18,306 16,710 17,973 18,497 19,556
          countries Imports 165,623 235,395 162,170 12,757 13,856 11,902 12,858 14,010 13,596
Balance +32,798 –22,483 +50,933 + 4,421 + 4,450 + 4,808 + 5,115 + 4,487 + 5,960
          of which:
               Switzerland Exports 60,638 70,611 66,780 5,420 5,712 5,080 5,475 5,654 6,021
  Imports 49,247 55,723 51,754 4,403 4,636 3,622 4,772 4,774 4,795
Balance +11,391 +14,888 +15,026 + 1,018 + 1,076 + 1,458 + 703 + 880 + 1,225
               United Kingdom Exports 65,002 73,764 78,434 6,622 6,727 6,212 6,565 7,076 7,505
  Imports 32,245 40,314 36,724 3,038 3,708 2,687 2,984 3,017 2,927
Balance +32,757 +33,449 +41,710 + 3,584 + 3,018 + 3,525 + 3,582 + 4,059 + 4,578
   II. Non-European  Exports 427,430 497,428 497,748 41,088 44,350 39,679 41,114 40,592 41,619
       countries Imports 399,604 531,409 482,294 37,159 40,892 38,854 40,906 42,687 40,105
Balance +27,827 –33,982 +15,455 + 3,930 + 3,458 + 825 + 208 – 2,095 + 1,513
       1. Africa Exports 23,068 26,462 28,742 2,096 2,373 2,121 2,185 2,193 2,205
Imports 26,241 34,213 32,471 2,899 3,036 2,566 2,291 2,264 2,585
Balance – 3,173 – 7,751 – 3,729 – 803 – 664 – 445 – 105 – 71 – 381
       2. America Exports 167,735 210,652 216,538 18,184 19,293 17,275 19,182 18,125 18,557
  Imports 101,525 131,979 130,477 9,968 11,298 10,888 10,609 11,155 10,453
Balance +66,210 +78,673 +86,062 + 8,216 + 7,994 + 6,387 + 8,573 + 6,970 + 8,104
           of which:
               United States  Exports 121,980 156,208 157,930 12,979 14,180 12,657 14,610 13,352 14,353
  Imports 72,316 93,338 94,600 7,056 8,066 7,876 7,573 7,808 7,291
Balance +49,664 +62,871 +63,330 + 5,923 + 6,114 + 4,781 + 7,036 + 5,545 + 7,062
       3. Asia Exports 224,897 246,289 238,709 19,666 21,403 19,229 18,683 19,269 19,791
  Imports 267,604 357,702 313,099 23,752 26,076 24,990 27,570 28,760 26,677
Balance –42,707 –111,413 –74,390 – 4,087 – 4,673 – 5,761 – 8,886 – 9,491 – 6,886
           of which:
               Middle East  Exports 26,090 29,648 32,039 2,747 2,947 2,741 3,053 3,022 3,134
  Imports 7,509 13,304 16,064 1,017 1,096 1,333 825 896 981
Balance +18,582 +16,344 +15,975 + 1,730 + 1,851 + 1,408 + 2,227 + 2,126 + 2,152
               Japan  Exports 18,245 20,511 20,238 1,693 1,998 2,315 1,560 1,867 2,524
Imports 23,477 25,413 25,582 1,722 1,869 1,750 1,914 2,011 1,818
Balance – 5,232 – 4,902 – 5,345 – 29 + 128 + 565 – 354 – 143 + 706
               People's Republic  Exports 103,564 106,762 97,346 7,972 7,952 7,003 6,870 7,150 6,692
               of China  2 Imports 142,964 192,830 156,834 12,122 13,681 13,114 14,131 15,131 14,077
Balance –39,400 –86,068 –59,487 – 4,150 – 5,730 – 6,112 – 7,261 – 7,981 – 7,385
               New industrial countries Exports 55,295 63,344 60,971 5,014 6,004 4,648 4,706 4,811 4,785
               and emerging markets  Imports 55,441 71,012 66,734 4,973 4,960 4,601 6,341 5,899 5,209
               of Asia  3 Balance – 146 – 7,668 – 5,763 + 41 + 1,043 + 47 – 1,635 – 1,088 – 424
       4. Oceania and Exports 11,731 14,024 13,759 1,143 1,282 1,055 1,063 1,005 1,066
           polar regions Imports 4,233 7,515 6,247 539 481 411 437 508 390
Balance + 7,497 + 6,510 + 7,512 + 603 + 801 + 644 + 626 + 497 + 677
* Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, Imports
(c.i.f.) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to
the current position. Euro area incl. Croatia.  1 Including fuel and other supplies forships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region.  2 Excluding Hong Kong.
3 Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea,
Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
78•
XII. External sector
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Services  Primary income
of which: 
Zeit Total Transport Travel  1Financial
servicesCharges for
the use of
intellectual
propertyTelecommuni-
cations-, 
computer and
information
servicesOther
business
servicesGouvernment
goods and
services  2Compensation
of employeesInvestment
incomeOther
primary
income  3
2019 – 14,443 + 3,638 – 45,947 + 10,195 + 18,368 – 9,763 – 2,650 + 3,127 + 4,507 +127,062 – 1,475
2020 + 6,633 – 5,392 – 14,678 + 9,696 + 18,149 – 7,941 – 4,483 + 2,919 + 5,434 + 83,611 – 1,984
2021 + 1,613 – 6,717 – 24,323 + 8,280 + 31,784 – 9,449 – 9,922 + 3,059 + 5,307 +122,189 – 3,066
2022 – 35,984 – 11,246 – 54,946 + 8,910 + 29,373 – 12,432 – 10,206 + 3,617 + 5,463 +143,120 – 5,390
2023 – 64,577 – 9,907 – 72,209 + 9,206 + 21,219 – 11,931 – 14,316 + 3,345 + 5,621 +145,132 – 4,331
2023 Q1 – 9,541 – 3,012 – 11,279 + 1,927 + 5,683 – 4,044 – 3,185 + 1,025 + 1,677 + 38,114 – 1,395
Q2 – 17,082 – 1,729 – 18,270 + 2,390 + 4,679 – 2,580 – 4,601 + 868 + 1,267 + 21,566 – 4,040
Q3 – 25,066 – 2,514 – 25,448 + 2,572 + 4,893 – 3,568 – 4,389 + 804 + 962 + 42,604 – 1,312
Q4 – 12,889 – 2,651 – 17,213 + 2,318 + 5,965 – 1,740 – 2,142 + 647 + 1,715 + 42,848 + 2,416
2024 Q1 – 12,166 – 1,972 – 12,612 + 2,659 + 4,846 – 3,777 – 4,363 + 850 + 1,554 + 36,245 – 722
Q2 – 20,366 – 1,982 – 19,534 + 2,572 + 4,466 – 2,388 – 6,092 + 725 + 1,190 + 20,466 – 1,176
Q3 – 28,498 – 2,591 – 26,046 + 2,341 + 3,840 – 3,481 – 5,485 + 859 + 1,059 + 41,284 – 1,273
2024 Jan. – 4,231 – 556 – 3,613 + 827 + 1,492 – 1,648 – 1,850 + 309 + 512 + 12,228 – 229
Feb. – 3,638 – 387 – 3,884 + 720 + 1,228 – 1,269 – 933 + 261 + 522 + 10,010 – 314
Mar. – 4,297 – 1,029 – 5,115 + 1,112 + 2,126 – 860 – 1,580 + 280 + 521 + 14,007 – 179
Apr. – 5,392 – 400 – 5,214 + 831 + 2,132 – 1,666 – 1,996 + 303 + 395 + 8,384 – 395
May – 8,088 – 838 – 7,000 + 1,033 + 1,054 – 1,133 – 2,044 + 125 + 397 + 1,641 – 383
June – 6,886 – 743 – 7,321 + 709 + 1,280 + 412 – 2,052 + 297 + 397 + 10,441 – 397
July – 10,346 – 649 – 7,322 + 863 + 662 – 2,001 – 2,585 + 275 + 353 + 12,412 – 415
Aug. – 10,743 – 879 – 9,793 + 644 + 829 – 979 – 1,605 + 289 + 353 + 14,358 – 415
Sep. – 7,409 – 1,063 – 8,931 + 834 + 2,349 – 501 – 1,295 + 295 + 353 + 14,514 – 443
r Oct. – 11,257 – 1,311 – 10,899 + 910 + 2,293 – 1,634 – 1,695 + 325 + 549 + 15,231 – 486
p Nov. – 5,977 – 731 – 4,692 + 749 + 1,145 – 1,152 – 2,505 + 457 + 546 + 16,504 – 475
1 Since 2001 the sample results of a household survey have been used on the
expenditure side.  2 Domestic public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on
services, not included elsewhere; including the receipts from foreign military bases.3 Includes, inter alia, taxes on leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU as
well as subsidies received from the EU.
5. Secondary income and Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Secondary income Capital account
General government All sectors excluding general government  2
of which:  of which: 
Zeit Total TotalCurrent
international
cooperation  1Current
taxes on
income, wealth,
etc. TotalPersonal transfers
between
resident and
non-resident
households  3of which: 
Workers’
remittances TotalNon-produced
non-financial
assetsCapital
transfers
2019 – 50,375 – 29,615 – 9,457 + 11,714 – 20,760 – 5,439 – 5,431 – 4,907 – 298 – 4,609
2020 – 53,406 – 35,008 – 11,620 + 10,959 – 18,398 – 5,920 – 5,908 – 10,520 – 3,547 – 6,973
2021 – 59,499 – 37,014 – 8,929 + 12,085 – 22,485 – 6,178 – 6,170 – 3,463 – 565 – 2,899
2022 – 67,486 – 40,145 – 15,002 + 14,285 – 27,341 – 8,028 – 7,149 – 20,290 – 15,993 – 4,297
2023 – 64,234 – 36,285 – 13,692 + 14,496 – 27,949 – 7,418 – 6,805 – 26,636 – 19,116 – 7,520
2023 Q1 – 18,776 – 9,952 – 3,196 + 2,453 – 8,824 – 1,882 – 1,731 – 13,931 – 10,626 – 3,305
Q2 – 10,225 – 3,898 – 1,915 + 7,773 – 6,327 – 1,846 – 1,691 – 4,074 – 3,071 – 1,003
Q3 – 15,805 – 9,878 – 2,959 + 2,120 – 5,927 – 1,844 – 1,691 – 3,906 – 2,270 – 1,636
Q4 – 19,428 – 12,557 – 5,622 + 2,151 – 6,871 – 1,846 – 1,691 – 4,725 – 3,149 – 1,576
2024 Q1 – 19,058 – 7,210 – 1,672 + 2,829 – 11,848 – 1,935 – 1,933 – 8,679 – 6,849 – 1,831
Q2 – 9,242 – 2,302 – 1,739 + 7,526 – 6,940 – 1,936 – 1,933 – 773 – 2,102 + 1,330
Q3 – 14,493 – 8,406 – 1,627 + 1,996 – 6,087 – 1,937 – 1,933 – 3,704 – 3,003 – 700
2024 Jan. – 9,530 – 2,191 – 640 + 552 – 7,339 – 645 – 644 – 6,807 – 5,390 – 1,417
Feb. – 4,709 – 2,339 – 535 + 1,140 – 2,370 – 645 – 644 – 1,995 – 1,858 – 137
Mar. – 4,818 – 2,680 – 497 + 1,137 – 2,138 – 644 – 644 + 123 + 400 – 277
Apr. – 3,148 – 1,049 – 383 + 1,856 – 2,099 – 646 – 644 – 2,028 – 2,945 + 917
May – 1,528 + 675 – 344 + 3,792 – 2,202 – 643 – 644 – 1,372 – 1,601 + 229
June – 4,567 – 1,928 – 1,012 + 1,878 – 2,639 – 647 – 644 + 2,628 + 2,444 + 184
July – 5,415 – 3,256 – 804 + 403 – 2,159 – 645 – 644 – 2,404 – 1,888 – 516
Aug. – 4,967 – 3,076 – 323 + 403 – 1,891 – 645 – 644 + 711 + 785 – 74
Sep. – 4,111 – 2,075 – 500 + 1,190 – 2,037 – 646 – 644 – 2,010 – 1,900 – 111
r Oct. – 5,842 – 3,449 – 1,130 + 510 – 2,393 – 643 – 641 – 2,802 – 2,236 – 566
p Nov. – 5,934 – 3,901 – 1,176 + 485 – 2,034 – 642 – 641 – 1,398 – 516 – 882
1 Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international
cooperation and other current transfers.  2 Includes insurance premiums and claims(excluding life insurance policies).  3 Transfers between resident and non-resident
households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
79•
XII. External sector
6. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany (net)
€ million
2024 2024
Item 2021 2022 2023 Q1  Q2 Q3 September October  r November  p
I.Net domestic investment abroad
 (increase: +) +800,770 +324,992 +280,033 +175,433 +84,956 +215,734 +115,014 +38,295 +43,310
1.Direct investment +167,462 +170,355 +85,258 +27,451 +31,970 +29,353 +33,164 + 5,735 + 531
Equity +107,448 +104,597 +62,703 +20,776 +25,507 +21,153 +12,572 + 1,815 + 8,242
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 +45,034 +57,980 +46,241 +21,056 +17,780 +15,369 + 5,333 + 6,830 + 6,363
Debt instruments +60,014 +65,758 +22,554 + 6,675 + 6,463 + 8,200 +20,592 + 3,921 – 7,711
2.Portfolio investment +179,294 +11,575 +143,320 +61,661 +47,020 +68,817 +29,827 +15,498 +12,156
Shares  2 +46,653 –15,196 – 5,520 + 4+ 3,659 + 6,559 + 3,396 + 3,228 – 4,967
Investment fund shares  3 +123,157 +32,299 +26,718 +21,543 +21,928 +26,326 + 6,800 +12,569 +14,584
Short-term  4
debt securities – 103 +16,257 + 6,044 + 6,578 + 3,601 – 1,065 + 889 – 707 – 2,515
Long-term   5
debt securities + 9,588 –21,785 +116,078 +33,536 +17,833 +36,998 +18,742 + 408 + 5,054
3.Financial derivatives and
employee stock options  6 +47,880 +41,519 +39,966 + 6,439 +10,291 +17,802 + 4,044 + 5,776 + 2,412
4.Other investment  7 +374,241 +97,117 +10,605 +79,504 – 5,073 +100,652 +47,124 +12,653 +26,541
MFIs  8 +112,904 +59,472 +42,150 +98,981 + 4,860 +79,599 +56,161 – 9,584 +16,551
Short-term +99,380 +34,961 +16,508 +94,149 + 3,442 +67,360 +56,635 – 7,863 +18,805
Long-term +13,204 +24,473 +25,575 + 4,861 + 1,405 +12,226 – 476 – 1,731 – 2,256
Enterprises and
households  9 +146,187 +48,548 +132,671 +18,572 –32,862 +38,573 – 7,420 +31,053 + 7,637
Short-term +113,542 +24,535 +113,708 +13,657 –36,500 +35,776 – 8,237 +30,280 + 6,431
Long-term –13,302 – 7,670 + 1,084 – 378 – 2,671 – 3,263 – 1,957 – 795 – 439
General government – 8,243 –25,070 + 8,123 – 3,312 – 258 + 850 + 1,290 – 840 + 328
Short-term – 7,256 –23,472 + 3,653 – 3,095 + 366 + 1,666 + 1,381 – 681 + 291
Long-term – 978 – 1,593 + 4,455 – 216 – 623 – 816 – 91 – 159 – 24
Bundesbank +123,394 +14,167 –172,339 –34,737 +23,187 –18,371 – 2,907 – 7,976 + 2,024
5.Reserve assets +31,892 + 4,426 + 884 + 378 + 746 – 890 + 855 – 1,367 + 1,671
II.Net foreign investment in the
reporting country (increase: +) +593,973 +125,587 +29,880 +128,553 +36,613 +120,957 +73,471 +33,743 +16,938
1.Direct investment +85,979 +58,137 +17,938 +15,044 +21,810 +19,504 +17,394 + 967 – 2,637
Equity +46,470 +22,102 +24,920 +16,228 – 1,215 + 6,310 + 3,387 + 4,924 + 1,123
of which: 
Reinvestment of earnings  1 + 8,355 +10,299 + 2,668 + 5,133 – 4,666 + 1,219 + 27 + 1,166 – 434
Debt instruments +39,509 +36,035 – 6,982 – 1,184 +23,026 +13,194 +14,007 – 3,957 – 3,760
2.Portfolio investment –18,451 – 1,568 +148,156 +58,313 +42,666 +56,359 +19,198 +32,715 +26,223
Shares  2 + 2,615 – 5,807 –12,984 – 4,197 – 583 + 1,201 + 1,993 – 1,460 – 799
Investment fund shares  3 – 8,423 – 3,207 – 1,984 – 467 + 933 + 97 – 1,119 – 953 – 583
Short-term  4
debt securities +30,545 –32,717 + 3,936 –20,838 –13,082 + 6,697 + 8,944 + 6,407 + 8,491
Long-term   5
debt securities –43,188 +40,163 +159,188 +83,815 +55,398 +48,365 + 9,380 +28,721 +19,115
3.Other investment  7 +526,446 +69,018 –136,214 +55,196 –27,863 +45,094 +36,879 + 60 – 6,649
MFIs  8 +161,287 +153,003 –55,282 +139,975 – 5,483 + 6,158 +55,768 –13,196 +22,272
Short-term +115,265 +160,861 –88,243 +140,506 – 6,995 – 9,431 +49,814 –18,015 +16,949
Long-term +46,044 – 7,860 +32,959 – 526 + 1,513 +15,588 + 5,954 + 4,818 + 5,325
Enterprises and
households  9 +141,143 +12,367 +57,938 +26,768 –22,307 +29,399 –21,457 +11,292 –24,625
Short-term +99,842 – 8,533 +28,422 +17,220 –26,917 +25,830 –19,391 +10,721 –23,293
Long-term +14,022 + 8,384 +15,335 + 6,124 + 1,030 + 1,158 – 2,150 + 443 – 1,405
General government – 2,780 – 5,634 – 622 + 2,287 – 848 + 1,556 + 1,047 + 3,047 + 572
Short-term – 451 – 3,253 – 968 + 2,318 – 645 + 1,617 + 1,007 + 2,764 + 263
Long-term – 2,326 – 2,379 + 537 – 31 – 204 – 60 + 41 + 284 + 309
Bundesbank +226,796 –90,717 –138,249 –113,835 + 775 + 7,981 + 1,521 – 1,083 – 4,868
III.Net financial account 
(net lending: +/net borrowing: -) +206,797 +199,405 +250,153 +46,880 +48,342 +94,777 +41,544 + 4,552 +26,373
1 Estimated on the basis of the figures on the level of direct investment stocks abroad
and in the Federal Republic of Germany (see Statistical series, direct investment
statistics).  2 Including participation certificates.  3 Including reinvestment of earnings.
4 Short-term: original maturity up to one year.  5 Up to and including 2012 without
accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited.6 Balance of transactions arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as
employee stock options.  7 Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency
and deposits.  8 Excluding Bundesbank.  9 Includes the following sectors: financial
corporations (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financial
corporations, households and non-profit institutions serving households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
80•
XII. External sector
7. External position of the Bundesbank *
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
End of
reporting
period Total TotalGold
and gold
receivablesSpecial
drawing
rightsReserve
position in
the IMFCurrency,
deposits and
securities Totalof which: 
Clearing
accounts
within the
ESCB  1Portfolio
investment  2External
liabilities  3 4Net
external
position  5
6 1999 Jan. 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 – – 9,628 85,688
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,891
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 – 30,308
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,923
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 – 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,454
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,932
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,003
2013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,921
2016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,723 397,727
2017 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,527 474,318
2018 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 770,519 439,462
2019 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 663,320 497,651
2020 1,429,236 219,127 166,904 14,014 8,143 30,066 1,152,757 1,136,002 57,353 781,339 647,898
2021 1,592,822 261,387 173,821 46,491 8,426 32,649 1,276,150 1,260,673 55,285 1,009,488 583,334
2022 1,617,056 276,488 184,036 48,567 9,480 34,404 1,290,317 1,269,076 50,251 919,441 697,614
2023 1,455,788 292,259 201,335 48,766 8,782 33,376 1,117,978 1,093,371 45,550 779,844 675,943
2024 1,464,391 363,705 270,580 50,888 8,267 33,970 1,063,165 1,046,318 37,521 723,234 741,157
2022 July 1,514,570 280,910 185,950 49,465 9,086 36,409 1,179,431 1,166,155 54,229 810,881 703,689
Aug. 1,590,572 280,160 184,794 49,614 9,300 36,451 1,258,187 1,245,014 52,225 842,576 747,996
Sep. 1,613,008 281,258 184,022 50,287 9,358 37,592 1,281,266 1,266,647 50,483 829,129 783,879
Oct. 1,569,272 274,421 178,101 49,675 9,527 37,119 1,243,873 1,230,005 50,977 811,035 758,237
Nov. 1,577,175 277,458 183,052 49,168 9,315 35,923 1,248,088 1,233,980 51,629 810,314 766,861
Dec. 1,617,056 276,488 184,036 48,567 9,480 34,404 1,290,317 1,269,076 50,251 919,441 697,614
2023 Jan. 1,508,507 281,692 190,062 48,256 9,437 33,938 1,176,042 1,162,354 50,772 793,716 714,791
Feb. 1,455,724 276,016 183,755 48,582 9,480 34,199 1,130,353 1,114,888 49,356 743,006 712,718
Mar. 1,522,539 288,131 196,405 48,039 9,373 34,314 1,184,604 1,170,620 49,804 791,478 731,061
Apr. 1,431,180 285,667 194,679 47,642 9,297 34,049 1,096,324 1,081,284 49,189 726,986 704,194
May 1,435,049 290,368 197,915 48,658 9,379 34,416 1,095,750 1,081,900 48,931 701,467 733,582
June 1,416,292 280,820 188,991 48,618 9,292 33,919 1,087,034 1,068,747 48,438 718,324 697,969
July 1,399,374 282,438 191,458 48,368 9,184 33,429 1,068,875 1,052,218 48,061 689,447 709,927
Aug. 1,406,665 284,364 192,914 48,979 9,218 33,253 1,074,575 1,056,420 47,725 687,342 719,322
Sep. 1,393,337 282,490 190,232 49,647 9,278 33,333 1,064,193 1,048,059 46,654 713,662 679,675
Oct. 1,415,403 295,288 202,630 49,531 9,256 33,871 1,074,627 1,058,985 45,488 688,966 726,437
Nov. 1,414,241 292,718 201,195 48,939 8,958 33,627 1,076,415 1,060,074 45,107 691,309 722,932
Dec. 1,455,788 292,259 201,335 48,766 8,782 33,376 1,117,978 1,093,371 45,550 779,844 675,943
2024 Jan. 1,397,172 294,402 202,641 49,412 8,921 33,428 1,058,508 1,041,902 44,261 669,890 727,281
Feb. 1,431,638 295,014 202,181 49,313 8,777 34,744 1,093,262 1,075,510 43,361 679,579 752,058
Mar. 1,436,723 312,728 220,571 49,281 8,563 34,314 1,083,242 1,065,759 40,754 666,365 770,359
Apr. 1,428,136 324,404 232,438 49,368 8,591 34,007 1,063,804 1,047,932 39,928 653,953 774,183
May 1,441,362 324,156 232,717 49,501 8,399 33,538 1,077,447 1,061,110 39,758 663,179 778,183
June 1,474,113 328,214 234,891 49,858 8,355 35,109 1,106,429 1,090,444 39,470 667,250 806,863
July 1,435,795 332,651 240,587 49,622 8,401 34,041 1,064,405 1,048,438 38,739 655,396 780,399
Aug. 1,465,316 335,474 244,992 49,207 8,318 32,957 1,090,965 1,075,239 38,877 673,181 792,134
Sep. 1,472,197 345,338 254,267 49,081 8,395 33,595 1,088,058 1,073,512 38,802 674,582 797,615
Oct. 1,483,529 364,864 274,165 49,292 8,339 33,068 1,080,082 1,064,456 38,583 673,967 809,562
Nov. 1,486,323 366,019 271,468 50,617 8,221 35,714 1,082,106 1,066,511 38,197 670,005 816,318
Dec. 1,464,391 363,705 270,580 50,888 8,267 33,970 1,063,165 1,046,318 37,521 723,234 741,157
* Assets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to
December 2000 the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revaluations,
at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the basis of
cumulative transaction values. From January 2001 all end-of-month levels are valued at
market prices.  1 Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (acc. to the respective country
designation), since November 2000 also balances with non-euro area central bankswithin the ESCB.  2 Mainly long-term debt securities from issuers within the euro area.
3 Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad.  4 See Deutsche Bundesbank,
Monthly Report, October 2014, p. 22.  5 Difference between External assets and
External liabilities.  6 Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January
1999.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
81•
XII. External sector
8. External positions of enterprises *
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities to non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
End of
reporting
period TotalBalances
with
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
grantedAdvance
payments
effected TotalLoans
from
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
usedAdvance
payments
received
Rest of the world
2020 1,034,224 244,415 789,808 549,157 240,652 213,833 26,819 1,429,615 172,417 1,257,198 1,038,111 219,087 130,318 88,769
2021 1,169,991 256,601 913,391 621,935 291,456 263,269 28,187 1,592,302 217,294 1,375,008 1,117,381 257,627 160,536 97,091
2022 1,247,020 250,759 996,261 675,328 320,933 291,361 29,572 1,629,245 177,095 1,452,150 1,158,894 293,255 192,495 100,760
2023 1,359,181 357,997 1,001,184 688,702 312,482 281,494 30,988 1,654,743 214,458 1,440,285 1,154,059 286,226 179,792 106,434
2024 June 1,382,690 339,991 1,042,699 730,119 312,581 278,599 33,982 1,725,982 226,799 1,499,182 1,212,544 286,638 171,509 115,128
July 1,432,423 393,828 1,038,594 733,360 305,234 270,443 34,792 1,785,281 279,927 1,505,354 1,227,080 278,274 165,004 113,270
Aug. 1,405,388 373,835 1,031,554 736,847 294,706 260,037 34,669 1,777,950 281,452 1,496,498 1,224,875 271,623 157,597 114,026
Sep. 1,414,579 353,509 1,061,071 756,189 304,882 270,733 34,149 1,769,241 254,345 1,514,896 1,232,397 282,499 169,437 113,062
r Oct. 1,452,169 373,407 1,078,762 768,766 309,996 275,689 34,307 1,790,232 279,563 1,510,670 1,224,795 285,875 172,227 113,648
p Nov. 1,456,529 370,766 1,085,762 775,335 310,428 275,433 34,994 1,767,013 255,692 1,511,321 1,224,265 287,057 173,304 113,753
EU Member States (27 excl. GB)
2020 613,888 185,572 428,316 334,474 93,842 80,833 13,009 903,486 97,851 805,635 715,854 89,781 61,887 27,895
2021 663,042 193,246 469,796 361,161 108,635 95,778 12,857 996,712 152,239 844,473 740,274 104,198 74,585 29,614
2022 712,912 190,773 522,139 397,836 124,303 110,821 13,482 1,006,529 126,999 879,530 764,435 115,095 84,054 31,041
2023 816,276 284,817 531,459 410,769 120,690 106,262 14,428 1,014,822 139,380 875,442 759,104 116,338 83,290 33,048
2024 June 842,695 282,433 560,262 435,062 125,199 110,147 15,052 1,074,174 160,895 913,279 794,953 118,325 83,736 34,589
July 881,884 323,486 558,399 439,274 119,125 103,663 15,462 1,108,544 189,172 919,372 804,920 114,452 79,379 35,072
Aug. 858,776 305,656 553,120 437,028 116,092 100,608 15,484 1,099,165 191,020 908,145 798,311 109,835 74,354 35,481
Sep. 841,816 283,710 558,107 438,019 120,088 104,935 15,153 1,106,355 177,448 928,907 812,072 116,835 81,683 35,152
r Oct. 862,133 299,256 562,877 440,216 122,661 107,110 15,551 1,110,124 182,080 928,044 809,776 118,267 82,600 35,668
p Nov. 855,736 290,106 565,630 439,981 125,649 109,851 15,799 1,102,761 174,883 927,878 808,167 119,711 84,484 35,227
Extra-EU Member States (27 incl. GB)
2020 420,335 58,843 361,492 214,682 146,810 133,000 13,810 526,129 74,566 451,563 322,257 129,306 68,431 60,875
2021 506,949 63,355 443,594 260,773 182,821 167,491 15,330 595,590 65,055 530,535 377,107 153,429 85,951 67,478
2022 534,107 59,986 474,122 277,492 196,629 180,540 16,090 622,716 50,096 572,620 394,460 178,160 108,441 69,719
2023 542,904 73,180 469,725 277,933 191,792 175,232 16,560 639,921 75,078 564,843 394,955 169,888 96,501 73,386
2024 June 539,996 57,558 482,438 295,056 187,381 168,452 18,930 651,808 65,905 585,904 417,591 168,313 87,773 80,540
July 550,538 70,342 480,196 294,086 186,110 166,780 19,330 676,737 90,755 585,982 422,160 163,822 85,625 78,197
Aug. 546,612 68,178 478,434 299,820 178,614 159,429 19,185 678,785 90,432 588,353 426,564 161,789 83,243 78,546
Sep. 572,763 69,799 502,964 318,170 184,794 165,798 18,997 662,886 76,898 585,989 420,325 165,664 87,754 77,909
r Oct. 590,036 74,151 515,885 328,550 187,336 168,580 18,756 680,109 97,482 582,626 415,018 167,608 89,627 77,981
p Nov. 600,792 80,660 520,132 335,354 184,778 165,583 19,196 664,253 80,809 583,444 416,098 167,346 88,819 78,527
Euro area (20)
2020 527,566 164,697 362,869 289,362 73,507 61,759 11,748 816,066 76,137 739,929 670,289 69,640 47,662 21,978
2021 556,549 171,231 385,318 299,905 85,413 73,729 11,684 911,712 130,558 781,154 699,065 82,089 58,608 23,481
2022 606,206 171,716 434,490 338,439 96,050 83,930 12,120 916,735 105,597 811,138 722,183 88,954 64,756 24,198
2023 713,257 266,931 446,326 352,927 93,399 80,382 13,016 921,774 119,987 801,787 712,302 89,485 64,843 24,642
2024 June 736,829 264,600 472,229 375,874 96,355 82,872 13,483 968,782 135,443 833,339 745,876 87,463 62,865 24,599
July 780,409 308,432 471,977 379,539 92,438 78,799 13,639 1,001,583 162,389 839,195 753,407 85,788 60,861 24,927
Aug. 757,298 290,678 466,620 376,992 89,629 76,020 13,609 988,084 160,154 827,930 746,380 81,549 56,524 25,026
Sep. 737,363 267,511 469,851 378,085 91,766 78,531 13,235 996,121 150,866 845,255 759,208 86,047 61,423 24,624
r Oct. 755,250 282,601 472,649 378,520 94,129 80,593 13,536 996,546 151,517 845,029 756,966 88,063 63,039 25,024
p Nov. 749,070 272,535 476,535 379,939 96,596 82,845 13,751 991,276 147,719 843,557 754,721 88,836 64,141 24,695
Extra-Euro area (20)
2020 506,658 79,719 426,939 259,794 167,145 152,074 15,071 613,549 96,280 517,269 367,822 149,448 82,656 66,792
2021 613,443 85,369 528,073 322,030 206,043 189,540 16,504 680,590 86,735 593,854 418,316 175,538 101,928 73,610
2022 640,814 . . . 224,882 207,431 17,452 712,510 . . . 204,301 127,739 76,562
2023 645,924 . . . 219,083 201,112 17,971 732,970 . . . 196,741 114,949 81,792
2024 June 645,861 . . . 216,226 195,727 20,499 757,200 . . . 199,175 108,645 90,530
July 652,014 . . . 212,797 191,644 21,153 783,697 . . . 192,487 104,144 88,343
Aug. 648,090 . . . 205,078 184,017 21,061 789,866 . . . 190,074 101,073 89,001
Sep. 677,217 . . . 213,116 192,202 20,914 773,121 . . . 196,452 108,014 88,438
r Oct. 696,919 . . . 215,867 195,096 20,771 793,687 . . . 197,812 109,188 88,624
p Nov. 707,458 . . . 213,831 192,588 21,244 775,737 . . . 198,221 109,163 89,058
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are shown
in Table 4 of Section IV., “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not beeneliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the figures
shown in Table XII.7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
82•
XII. External sector
9. ECB`s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly
or monthly
averageAustralia
AUDCanada
CADChina
CNYDenmark
DKKJapan
JPYNorway
NOKSweden
SEKSwitzerland
CHFUnited Kingdom
GBPUnited States
USD
2013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.3281
2014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.1069
2017 1.4732 1.4647 7.6290 7.4386 126.71 9.3270 9.6351 1.1117 0.87667 1.1297
2018 1.5797 1.5294 7.8081 7.4532 130.40 9.5975 10.2583 1.1550 0.88471 1.1810
2019 1.6109 1.4855 7.7355 7.4661 122.01 9.8511 10.5891 1.1124 0.87777 1.1195
2020 1.6549 1.5300 7.8747 7.4542 121.85 10.7228 10.4848 1.0705 0.88970 1.1422
2021 1.5749 1.4826 7.6282 7.4370 129.88 10.1633 10.1465 1.0811 0.85960 1.1827
2022 1.5167 1.3695 7.0788 7.4396 138.03 10.1026 10.6296 1.0047 0.85276 1.0530
2023 1.6288 1.4595 7.6600 7.4509 151.99 11.4248 11.4788 0.9718 0.86979 1.0813
2024 1.6397 1.4821 7.7875 7.4589 163.85 11.6290 11.4325 0.9526 0.84662 1.0824
2023 Aug. 1.6818 1.4703 7.9096 7.4522 157.96 11.4127 11.8117 0.9588 0.85892 1.0909
Sep. 1.6622 1.4458 7.7967 7.4566 157.80 11.4525 11.8417 0.9600 0.86158 1.0684
Oct. 1.6637 1.4474 7.7200 7.4604 158.04 11.6284 11.6472 0.9547 0.86798 1.0563
Nov. 1.6634 1.4828 7.8087 7.4581 161.84 11.7958 11.5475 0.9634 0.87045 1.0808
Dec. 1.6321 1.4653 7.7870 7.4556 157.21 11.5333 11.2028 0.9441 0.86168 1.0903
2024 Jan. 1.6422 1.4631 7.8201 7.4572 159.46 11.3501 11.2834 0.9368 0.85873 1.0905
Feb. 1.6533 1.4564 7.7651 7.4550 161.38 11.3843 11.2500 0.9462 0.85466 1.0795
Mar. 1.6586 1.4726 7.8297 7.4566 162.77 11.5214 11.3054 0.9656 0.85524 1.0872
Apr. 1.6469 1.4661 7.7658 7.4596 165.03 11.6828 11.5910 0.9761 0.85658 1.0728
May 1.6317 1.4780 7.8206 7.4606 168.54 11.5988 11.6186 0.9830 0.85564 1.0812
June 1.6206 1.4750 7.8051 7.4592 169.81 11.4178 11.2851 0.9616 0.84643 1.0759
July 1.6257 1.4868 7.8750 7.4606 171.17 11.7160 11.5324 0.9676 0.84332 1.0844
Aug. 1.6559 1.5049 7.8736 7.4614 161.06 11.7895 11.4557 0.9450 0.85150 1.1012
Sep. 1.6398 1.5037 7.8611 7.4600 159.08 11.7852 11.3577 0.9414 0.84021 1.1106
Oct. 1.6250 1.4993 7.7276 7.4593 163.20 11.7907 11.4048 0.9386 0.83496 1.0904
Nov. 1.6267 1.4855 7.6617 7.4583 163.23 11.7408 11.5828 0.9355 0.83379 1.0630
Dec. 1.6529 1.4915 7.6298 7.4589 161.08 11.7447 11.5040 0.9339 0.82804 1.0479
* Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference
rates, see Statistical Series Exchange rate statistics.
10. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units … 
1999 January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603    
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399    
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573  
France French franc FRF 6.55957  
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583  
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27        
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399    
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371  
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482      
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386      
2001 January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750      
2007 January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640      
2008 January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009 January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260    
2011 January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466    
2014 January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015 January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280  
2023 January 1 Croatia Croatian kuna HRK 7.53450  

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
January 2025
83•
XII. External sector
11. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness *
Q1 1999 = 100
Effective exchange rates of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the  Indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness
extended EER group of trading partners  1broad EER group of
trading partners  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 vis-à-vis Based on consumer price indices vis-à-vis 
27 selected industrial countries  4
of which:
Period NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indicesIn real terms
based on
the deflators
of gross
domestic
product  3In real terms
based on
unit labour
costs of
national
economy  3 NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indices TotalEuro area
countriesNon-
euro area
countries 37 countries  527 selected
industrial
countries  437 countries  560 countries  6
1999 96.2 96.1 95.8 96.1 96.5 95.9 97.9 99.6 95.7 97.6 98.3 98.1 97.8
2000 87.0 86.8 85.9 85.5 88.0 86.1 92.0 97.5 85.5 91.2 93.1 92.3 91.2
2001 87.4 87.1 86.7 84.5 90.1 86.9 91.9 96.8 86.2 90.6 93.0 91.7 91.1
2002 89.7 90.3 89.9 88.2 94.4 90.6 92.7 96.1 88.7 91.4 93.5 92.2 91.9
2003 100.5 101.6 101.3 99.5 106.5 101.7 96.3 95.3 98.0 95.8 97.0 96.7 96.8
2004 104.3 105.6 104.4 102.8 111.0 105.6 96.8 94.2 100.6 96.2 98.5 98.2 98.4
2005 102.9 104.3 102.4 100.9 109.1 103.2 95.4 92.6 99.4 93.9 98.5 97.2 96.8
2006 102.9 104.3 101.9 99.9 109.3 102.6 94.1 91.0 98.8 92.2 98.6 96.8 96.0
2007 106.5 107.3 104.2 101.6 112.9 104.8 95.3 90.3 102.9 92.7 100.9 98.3 97.4
2008 110.4 110.3 106.3 105.6 117.8 107.3 95.6 89.0 106.1 92.0 102.4 98.5 97.6
2009 111.9 111.1 107.7 109.1 120.8 108.3 96.2 90.1 105.8 93.0 101.9 98.6 97.9
2010 104.6 103.3 99.3 101.7 112.1 99.3 93.4 89.5 99.2 88.9 98.8 94.3 92.5
2011 104.4 102.4 97.4 100.0 112.9 98.8 93.0 89.2 98.6 88.2 98.2 93.5 91.9
2012 98.6 97.0 91.8 94.3 107.6 94.0 90.9 89.0 93.5 85.5 95.9 90.5 88.9
2013 102.2 100.1 94.9 97.2 112.4 97.0 93.3 89.6 98.6 87.6 98.1 92.3 90.9
2014 102.4 99.5 94.8 97.5 114.7 97.4 94.0 90.5 99.1 88.4 98.2 92.5 91.5
2015 92.5 89.7 86.0 86.6 106.1 88.7 90.7 91.1 90.1 84.4 94.3 87.8 86.9
2016 95.2 91.6 88.3 p 88.0 110.1 90.7 91.6 91.6 91.7 85.8 95.0 88.8 88.1
2017 97.5 93.6 89.5 p 89.0 112.5 92.0 92.8 91.6 94.6 86.5 96.3 89.9 88.9
2018 100.0 95.8 91.0 p 90.8 117.3 95.2 94.1 91.7 97.6 87.5 97.7 91.1 90.8
2019 98.1 93.3 89.3 p 88.4 115.5 92.5 93.1 91.9 94.8 86.6 96.4 89.9 89.4
2020 99.7 93.7 90.6 p 89.6 119.2 93.9 93.3 92.1 94.9 87.3 96.4 90.1 90.1
2021 99.6 93.7 89.2 p 87.6 120.5 94.3 94.1 92.3 96.8 87.3 97.4 90.6 90.9
2022 95.3 90.8 84.5 p 82.8 116.1 p 90.9 92.4 91.7 93.1 85.4 95.9 89.1 89.0
2023 98.1 94.0 89.0 p 86.6 121.8 p 94.7 93.8 91.9 96.6 87.5 98.0 91.2 91.6
2024 98.4 p 94.4 ... ... 124.1 p 95.0 … … … … p98.0 p 91.6 p 91.9
2022 July 93.9 89.2 114.1 p 88.9 94.8 87.9 87.5
Aug. 93.4 88.9 82.9 p 81.1 113.6 p 88.7 91.3 91.3 91.2 84.5 94.5 87.6 87.3
Sep. 93.9 89.9 113.9 p 89.4 95.9 89.1 88.7
Oct. 94.5 91.3 114.8 p 90.8 96.0 89.7 89.4
Nov. 95.7 92.2 85.4 p 83.4 116.6 p 92.0 92.4 91.7 93.3 85.9 97.0 90.6 90.3
Dec. 96.8 92.6 118.6 p 92.9 96.2 89.7 89.8
2023 Jan. 97.1 92.8 119.2 p 93.1 97.5 90.4 90.4
Feb. 97.0 93.1 87.4 p 85.3 119.3 p 93.4 93.2 91.5 95.7 86.4 97.6 90.5 90.6
Mar. 97.3 93.2 119.7 p 93.6 98.0 90.9 91.1
Apr. 98.4 94.2 121.5 p 94.9 98.6 91.6 91.9
May 98.0 93.6 88.9 p 86.1 120.9 p 94.2 93.8 91.9 96.7 87.3 98.0 91.1 91.3
June 98.2 93.8 121.8 p 94.7 98.2 91.3 91.8
July 99.2 95.0 123.7 p 96.1 98.4 91.8 92.5
Aug. 99.0 95.1 90.0 p 87.4 123.7 p 96.1 93.8 91.8 96.7 87.9 98.3 91.8 92.4
Sep. 98.5 94.7 123.0 p 95.5 98.0 91.7 92.1
Oct. 98.0 94.1 122.5 p 95.0 97.7 91.3 91.7
Nov. 98.7 94.6 89.8 p 87.5 123.4 p 95.3 94.3 92.4 97.1 88.2 98.1 91.5 91.8
Dec. 98.2 93.9 123.2 p 94.9 97.6 91.0 91.4
2024 Jan. 98.4 94.4 123.6 p 95.2 97.8 91.4 p 91.8
Feb. 98.1 94.1 89.6 p 87.6 123.3 p 94.9 94.0 92.3 96.5 88.0 97.7 91.3 p 91.6
Mar. 98.8 94.8 124.2 p 95.5 98.1 91.8 p 92.1
Apr. 98.6 94.5 124.0 p 95.2 98.3 91.8 p 92.1
May 98.9 94.8 89.7 p 87.8 124.4 p 95.3 94.2 92.3 97.0 88.1 98.5 92.0 p 92.2
June 98.5 94.5 124.0 p 95.1 98.1 91.8 p 92.0
July 99.0 p 95.1 124.8 p 95.6 98.4 p 92.0 p 92.2
Aug. 99.0 p 95.0 p 90.2 p 87.9 125.2 p 95.7 94.1 92.2 97.0 88.2 98.1 p 91.7 p 92.1
Sep. 98.8 p 94.8 125.2 p 95.6 98.2 p 91.7 p 92.1
Oct. 98.2 p 94.3 124.4 p 95.0 98.1 p 91.7 p 92.0
Nov. 97.5 p 93.6 ... ... 123.5 p 94.1 … … … … 97.4 p 91.1 p 91.4
Dec. 96.9 p 92.9 122.7 p 93.4 p97.1 p 90.9 p 91.1
* The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the curren-
cy concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German economy's price
competitiveness is consistent with the procedure to compute the effective exchange
rates of the euro. A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. The
weights are based on trade in manufactured goods and services. For more detailed in-
formation on methodology and weighting scale, see the website of the Deutsche
Bundesbank (https://www.bundesbank.de/content/796162).  1 The calculations are
based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral exchange rates of the
euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the following 18 countries: Australia, Bulgaria, Canada,
China, Czechia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Norway, Poland, Romania,
Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United
States. Where current price and wage indices were not available, estimates were used.
2 Includes countries belonging to the extended EER group of trading partners (fixed
composition) and additionally the following 23 countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil,
Chile, Colombia, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zea-
land, Peru, Philippines, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Taiwan,Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine and United Arab Emirates. The ECB has suspended the
publication and calculation of the euro foreign exchange reference rate against Russian
rouble with effect from March 2, 2022 until further notice. For the calculation of
effective exchange rates, an indicative rate is used for the Russian Federation from that
date. It is calculated from the daily RUB/USD rates determined by the Bank of Russia in
conjunction with the respective ECB's euro foreign exchange reference rate to the US
dollar.  3 Annual and quarterly averages.  4 Euro area countries (from 2001 including
Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta, from
2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including Latvia, from
2015 including Lithuania, from 2023 including Croatia) as well as Canada, Denmark,
Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.
5 Euro area countries (current composition) and countries belonging to the extended
EER group of trading partners (fixed comosition).  6 Euro area countries (current compo-
sition) and countries belonging to the broad EER group of trading partners (fixed
composition).

